[Several] Works by Emile Zola

today.  Go and say you don't expect me now."

"Madame will think the matter over; Madame will receive Monsieur 
Steiner," murmured Zoe gravely, without budging from her place.  She 
was annoyed to see her mistress on the verge of committing another 
foolish mistake.

Then she mentioned the Walachian, who ought by now to find time 
hanging heavy on his hands in the bedroom.  Whereupon Nana grew 
furious and more obstinate than ever.  No, she would see nobody, 
nobody!  Who'd sent her such a blooming leech of a man?

"Chuck 'em all out!  I--I'm going to play a game of bezique with 
Madame Maloir.  I prefer doing that."

The bell interrupted her remarks.  That was the last straw.  Another 
of the beggars yet!  She forbade Zoe to go and open the door, but 
the latter had left the kitchen without listening to her, and when 
she reappeared she brought back a couple of cards and said 
authoritatively:

"I told them that Madame was receiving visitors.  The gentlemen are 
in the drawing room."

Nana had sprung up, raging, but the names of the Marquis de Chouard 
and of Count Muffat de Beuville, which were inscribed on the cards, 
calmed her down.  For a moment or two she remained silent.

"Who are they?" she asked at last.  "You know them?"

"I know the old fellow," replied Zoe, discreetly pursing up her 
lips.

And her mistress continuing to question her with her eyes, she added 
simply:

"I've seen him somewhere."

This remark seemed to decide the young woman.  Regretfully she left 
the kitchen, that asylum of steaming warmth, where you could talk 
and take your ease amid the pleasant fumes of the coffeepot which 
was being kept warm over a handful of glowing embers.  She left Mme 
Maloir behind her.  That lady was now busy reading her fortune by 
the cards; she had never yet taken her hat off, but now in order to 
be more at her ease she undid the strings and threw them back over 
her shoulders.

In the dressing room, where Zoe rapidly helped her on with a tea 
gown, Nana revenged herself for the way in which they were all 
boring her by muttering quiet curses upon the male sex.  These big 
words caused the lady's maid not a little distress, for she saw with 
pain that her mistress was not rising superior to her origin as 
quickly as she could have desired.  She even made bold to beg Madame 
to calm herself.

"You bet," was Nana's crude answer; "they're swine; they glory in 
that sort of thing."

Nevertheless, she assumed her princesslike manner, as she was wont 
to call it.  But just when she was turning to go into the drawing 
room Zoe held her back and herself introduced the Marquis de Chouard 
and the Count Muffat into the dressing room.  It was much better so.

"I regret having kept you waiting, gentlemen," said the young woman 
with studied politeness.

The two men bowed and seated themselves.  A blind of embroidered 
tulle kept the little room in twilight.  It was the most elegant 
chamber in the flat, for it was hung with some light-colored fabric 
and contained a cheval glass framed in inlaid wood, a lounge chair 
and some others with arms and blue satin upholsteries.  On the 
toilet table the bouquets--roses, lilacs and hyacinths--appeared 
like a very ruin of flowers.  Their perfume was strong and 
penetrating, while through the dampish air of the place, which was 
full of the spoiled exhalations of the washstand, came occasional 
whiffs of a more pungent scent, the scent of some grains or dry 
patchouli ground to fine powder at the bottom of a cup.  And as she 
gathered herself together and drew up her dressing jacket, which had 
been ill fastened, Nana had all the appearance of having been 
surprised at her toilet: her skin was still damp; she smiled and 
looked quite startled amid her frills and laces.

"Madame, you will pardon our insistence," said the Count Muffat 
gravely.  "We come on a quest.  Monsieur and I are members of the 
Benevolent Organization of the district."

The Marquis de Chouard hastened gallantly to add:

"When we learned that a great artiste lived in this house we 
promised ourselves that we would put the claims of our poor people 
before her in a very special manner.  Talent is never without a 
heart."

Nana pretended to be modest.  She answered them with little 
assenting movements of her head, making rapid reflections at the 
same time.  It must be the old man that had brought the other one: 
he had such wicked eyes.  And yet the other was not to be trusted 
either: the veins near his temples were so queerly puffed up.  He 
might quite well have come by himself.  Ah, now that she thought of 
it, it was this way: the porter had given them her name, and they 
had egged one another on, each with his own ends in view.

"Most certainly, gentlemen, you were quite right to come up," she 
said with a very good grace.

But the electric bell made her tremble again.  Another call, and 
that Zoe always opening the door!  She went on:

"One is only too happy to be able to give."

At bottom she was flattered.

"Ah, madame," rejoined the marquis, "if only you knew about it! 
there's such misery!  Our district has more than three thousand poor 
people in it, and yet it's one of the richest.  You cannot picture 
to yourself anything like the present distress--children with no 
bread, women ill, utterly without assistance, perishing of the 
cold!"

"The poor souls!" cried Nana, very much moved.

Such was her feeling of compassion that tears flooded her fine eyes.  
No longer studying deportment, she leaned forward with a quick 
movement, and under her open dressing jacket her neck became 
visible, while the bent position of her knees served to outline the 
rounded contour of the thigh under the thin fabric of her skirt.  A 
little flush of blood appeared in the marquis's cadaverous cheeks.  
Count Muffat, who was on the point of speaking, lowered his eyes.  
The air of that little room was too hot: it had the close, heavy 
warmth of a greenhouse.  The roses were withering, and intoxicating 
odors floated up from the patchouli in the cup.

"One would like to be very rich on occasions like this," added Nana.  
"Well, well, we each do what we can.  Believe me, gentlemen, if I 
had known--"

She was on the point of being guilty of a silly speech, so melted 
was she at heart.  But she did not end her sentence and for a moment 
was worried at not being able to remember where she had put her 
fifty francs on changing her dress.  But she recollected at last: 
they must be on the corner of her toilet table under an inverted 
pomatum pot.  As she was in the act of rising the bell sounded for 
quite a long time.  Capital!  Another of them still!  It would never 
end.  The count and the marquis had both risen, too, and the ears of 
the latter seemed to be pricked up and, as it were, pointing toward 
the door; doubtless he knew that kind of ring.  Muffat looked at 
him; then they averted their gaze mutually.  They felt awkward and 
once more assumed their frigid bearing, the one looking square-set 
and solid with his thick head of hair, the other drawing back his 
lean shoulders, over which fell his fringe of thin white locks.

"My faith," said Nana, bringing the ten big silver pieces and quite 
determined to laugh about it, "I am going to entrust you with this, 
gentlemen.  It is for the poor."

And the adorable little dimple in her chin became apparent.  She 
assumed her favorite pose, her amiable baby expression, as she held 
the pile of five-franc pieces on her open palm and offered it to the 
men, as though she were saying to them, "Now then, who wants some?"  
The count was the sharper of the two.  He took fifty francs but left 
one piece behind and, in order to gain possession of it, had to pick 
it off the young woman's very skin, a moist, supple skin, the touch 
of which sent a thrill through him.  She was thoroughly merry and 
did not cease laughing.

"Come, gentlemen," she continued.  "Another time I hope to give 
more."

The gentlemen no longer had any pretext for staying, and they bowed 
and went toward the door.  But just as they were about to go out the 
bell rang anew.  The marquis could not conceal a faint smile, while 
a frown made the count look more grave than before.  Nana detained 
them some seconds so as to give Zoe time to find yet another corner 
for the newcomers.  She did not relish meetings at her house.  Only 
this time the whole place must be packed!  She was therefore much 
relieved when she saw the drawing room empty and asked herself 
whether Zoe had really stuffed them into the cupboards.

"Au revoir, gentlemen," she said, pausing on the threshold of the 
drawing room.

It was as though she lapped them in her laughing smile and clear, 
unclouded glance.  The Count Muffat bowed slightly.  Despite his 
great social experience he felt that he had lost his equilibrium.  
He needed air; he was overcome with the dizzy feeling engendered in 
that dressing room with a scent of flowers, with a feminine essence 
which choked him.  And behind his back, the Marquis de Chouard, who 
was sure that he could not be seen, made so bold as to wink at Nana, 
his whole face suddenly altering its expression as he did so, and 
his tongue nigh lolling from his mouth.

When the young woman re-entered the little room, where Zoe was 
awaiting her with letters and visiting cards, she cried out, 
laughing more heartily than ever:

"There are a pair of beggars for you!  Why, they've got away with my 
fifty francs!"

She wasn't vexed.  It struck her as a joke that MEN should have got 
money out of her.  All the same, they were swine, for she hadn't a 
sou left.  But at sight of the cards and the letters her bad temper 
returned.  As to the letters, why, she said "pass" to them.  They 
were from fellows who, after applauding her last night, were now 
making their declarations.  And as to the callers, they might go 
about their business!

Zoe had stowed them all over the place, and she called attention to 
the great capabilities of the flat, every room in which opened on 
the corridor.  That wasn't the case at Mme Blanche's, where people 
had all to go through the drawing room.  Oh yes, Mme Blanche had had 
plenty of bothers over it!

"You will send them all away," continued Nana in pursuance of her 
idea.  "Begin with the nigger."

"Oh, as to him, madame, I gave him his marching orders a while ago," 
said Zoe with a grin.  "He only wanted to tell Madame that he 
couldn't come to-night."

There was vast joy at this announcement, and Nana clapped her hands.  
He wasn't coming, what good luck!  She would be free then!  And she 
emitted sighs of relief, as though she had been let off the most 
abominable of tortures.  Her first thought was for Daguenet.  Poor 
duck, why, she had just written to tell him to wait till Thursday!  
Quick, quick, Mme Maloir should write a second letter!  But Zoe 
announced that Mme Maloir had slipped away unnoticed, according to 
her wont.  Whereupon Nana, after talking of sending someone to him, 
began to hesitate.  She was very tired.  A long night's sleep--oh, 
it would be so jolly!  The thought of such a treat overcame her at 
last.  For once in a way she could allow herself that!

"I shall go to bed when I come back from the theater," she murmured 
greedily, "and you won't wake me before noon."

Then raising her voice:

"Now then, gee up!  Shove the others downstairs!"

Zoe did not move.  She would never have dreamed of giving her 
mistress overt advice, only now she made shift to give Madame the 
benefit of her experience when Madame seemed to be running her hot 
head against a wall.

"Monsieur Steiner as well?" she queried curtly.

"Why, certainly!" replied Nana.  "Before all the rest."

The maid still waited, in order to give her mistress time for 
reflection.  Would not Madame be proud to get such a rich gentleman 
away from her rival Rose Mignon--a man, moreover, who was known in 
all the theaters?

"Now make haste, my dear," rejoined Nana, who perfectly understood 
the situation, "and tell him he pesters me."

But suddenly there was a reversion of feeling.  Tomorrow she might 
want him.  Whereupon she laughed, winked once or twice and with a 
naughty little gesture cried out:

"After all's said and done, if I want him the best way even now is 
to kick him out of doors."

Zoe seemed much impressed.  Struck with a sudden admiration, she 
gazed at her mistress and then went and chucked Steiner out of doors 
without further deliberation.

Meanwhile Nana waited patiently for a second or two in order to give 
her time to sweep the place out, as she phrased it.  No one would 
ever have expected such a siege!  She craned her head into the 
drawing room and found it empty.  The dining room was empty too.  
But as she continued her visitation in a calmer frame of mind, 
feeling certain that nobody remained behind, she opened the door of 
a closet and came suddenly upon a very young man.  He was sitting on 
the top of a trunk, holding a huge bouquet on his knees and looking 
exceedingly quiet and extremely well behaved.

"Goodness gracious me!" she cried.  "There's one of 'em in there 
even now!"  The very young man had jumped down at sight of her and 
was blushing as red as a poppy.  He did not know what to do with his 
bouquet, which he kept shifting from one hand to the other, while 
his looks betrayed the extreme of emotion.  His youth, his 
embarrassment and the funny figure he cut in his struggles with his 
flowers melted Nana's heart, and she burst into a pretty peal of 
laughter.  Well, now, the very children were coming, were they?  Men 
were arriving in long clothes.  So she gave up all airs and graces, 
became familiar and maternal, tapped her leg and asked for fun:

"You want me to wipe your nose; do you, baby?"

"Yes," replied the lad in a low, supplicating tone.

This answer made her merrier than ever.  He was seventeen years old, 
he said.  His name was Georges Hugon.  He was at the Varietes last 
night and now he had come to see her.

"These flowers are for me?"

"Yes."

"Then give 'em to me, booby!"

But as she took the bouquet from him he sprang upon her hands and 
kissed them with all the gluttonous eagerness peculiar to his 
charming time of life.  She had to beat him to make him let go.  
There was a dreadful little dribbling customer for you!  But as she 
scolded him she flushed rosy-red and began smiling.  And with that 
she sent him about his business, telling him that he might call 
again.  He staggered away; he could not find the doors.

Nana went back into her dressing room, where Francis made his 
appearance almost simultaneously in order to dress her hair for the 
evening.  Seated in front of her mirror and bending her head beneath 
the hairdresser's nimble hands, she stayed silently meditative.  
Presently, however, Zoe entered, remarking:

"There's one of them, madame, who refuses to go."

"Very well, he must be left alone," she answered quietly.

"If that comes to that they still keep arriving."

"Bah!  Tell 'em to wait.  When they begin to feel too hungry they'll 
be off."  Her humor had changed, and she was now delighted to make 
people wait about for nothing.  A happy thought struck her as very 
amusing; she escaped from beneath Francis' hands and ran and bolted 
the doors.  They might now crowd in there as much as they liked; 
they would probably refrain from making a hole through the wall.  
Zoe could come in and out through the little doorway leading to the 
kitchen.  However, the electric bell rang more lustily than ever.  
Every five minutes a clear, lively little ting-ting recurred as 
regularly as if it had been produced by some well-adjusted piece of 
mechanism.  And Nana counted these rings to while the time away 
withal.  But suddenly she remembered something.

"I say, where are my burnt almonds?"

Francis, too, was forgetting about the burnt almonds.  But now he 
drew a paper bag from one of the pockets of his frock coat and 
presented it to her with the discreet gesture of a man who is 
offering a lady a present.  Nevertheless, whenever his accounts came 
to be settled, he always put the burnt almonds down on his bill.  
Nana put the bag between her knees and set to work munching her 
sweetmeats, turning her head from time to time under the 
hairdresser's gently compelling touch.

"The deuce," she murmured after a silence, "there's a troop for 
you!"

Thrice, in quick succession, the bell had sounded.  Its summonses 
became fast and furious.  There were modest tintinnabulations which 
seemed to stutter and tremble like a first avowal; there were bold 
rings which vibrated under some rough touch and hasty rings which 
sounded through the house with shivering rapidity.  It was a regular 
peal, as Zoe said, a peal loud enough to upset the neighborhood, 
seeing that a whole mob of men were jabbing at the ivory button, one 
after the other.  That old joker Bordenave had really been far too 
lavish with her address.  Why, the whole of yesterday's house was 
coming!

"By the by, Francis, have you five louis?" said Nana.

He drew back, looked carefully at her headdress and then quietly 
remarked:

"Five louis, that's according!"

"Ah, you know if you want securities. . ." she continued.

And without finishing her sentence, she indicated the adjoining 
rooms with a sweeping gesture.  Francis lent the five louis.  Zoe, 
during each momentary respite, kept coming in to get Madame's things 
ready.  Soon she came to dress her while the hairdresser lingered 
with the intention of giving some finishing touches to the 
headdress.  But the bell kept continually disturbing the lady's 
maid, who left Madame with her stays half laced and only one shoe 
on.  Despite her long experience, the maid was losing her head.  
After bringing every nook and corner into requisition and putting 
men pretty well everywhere, she had been driven to stow them away in 
threes and fours, which was a course of procedure entirely opposed 
to her principles.  So much the worse for them if they ate each 
other up!  It would afford more room!  And Nana, sheltering behind 
her carefully bolted door, began laughing at them, declaring that 
she could hear them pant.  They ought to be looking lovely in there 
with their tongues hanging out like a lot of bowwows sitting round 
on their behinds.  Yesterday's success was not yet over, and this 
pack of men had followed up her scent.

"Provided they don't break anything," she murmured.

She began to feel some anxiety, for she fancied she felt their hot 
breath coming through chinks in the door.  But Zoe ushered 
Labordette in, and the young woman gave a little shout of relief.  
He was anxious to tell her about an account he had settled for her 
at the justice of peace's court.  But she did not attend and said:

"I'll take you along with me.  We'll have dinner together, and 
afterward you shall escort me to the Varietes.  I don't go on before 
half-past nine."

Good old Labordette, how lucky it was he had come!  He was a fellow 
who never asked for any favors.  He was only the friend of the 
women, whose little bits of business he arranged for them.  Thus on 
his way in he had dismissed the creditors in the anteroom.  Indeed, 
those good folks really didn't want to be paid.  On the contrary, if 
they HAD been pressing for payment it was only for the sake of 
complimenting Madame and of personally renewing their offers of 
service after her grand success of yesterday.

"Let's be off, let's be off," said Nana, who was dressed by now.

But at that moment Zoe came in again, shouting:

"I refuse to open the door any more.  They're waiting in a crowd all 
down the stairs."

A crowd all down the stairs!  Francis himself, despite the English 
stolidity of manner which he was wont to affect, began laughing as 
he put up his combs.  Nana, who had already taken Labordette's arm, 
pushed him into the kitchen and effected her escape.  At last she 
was delivered from the men and felt happily conscious that she might 
now enjoy his society anywhere without fear of stupid interruptions.

"You shall see me back to my door," she said as they went down the 
kitchen stairs.  "I shall feel safe, in that case.  Just fancy, I 
want to sleep a whole night quite by myself--yes, a whole night!  
It's sort of infatuation, dear boy!"



CHAPTER III


The countess Sabine, as it had become customary to call Mme Muffat 
de Beuville in order to distinguish her from the count's mother, who 
had died the year before, was wont to receive every Tuesday in her 
house in the Rue Miromesnil at the corner of the Rue de Pentievre.  
It was a great square building, and the Muffats had lived in it for 
a hundred years or more.  On the side of the street its frontage 
seemed to slumber, so lofty was it and dark, so sad and conventlike, 
with its great outer shutters, which were nearly always closed.  And 
at the back in a little dark garden some trees had grown up and were 
straining toward the sunlight with such long slender branches that 
their tips were visible above the roof.

This particular Tuesday, toward ten o'clock in the evening, there 
were scarcely a dozen people in the drawing room.  When she was only 
expecting intimate friends the countess opened neither the little 
drawing room nor the dining room.  One felt more at home on such 
occasions and chatted round the fire.  The drawing room was very 
large and very lofty; its four windows looked out upon the garden, 
from which, on this rainy evening of the close of April, issued a 
sensation of damp despite the great logs burning on the hearth.  The 
sun never shone down into the room; in the daytime it was dimly lit 
up by a faint greenish light, but at night, when the lamps and the 
chandelier were burning, it looked merely a serious old chamber with 
its massive mahogany First Empire furniture, its hangings and chair 
coverings of yellow velvet, stamped with a large design.  Entering 
it, one was in an atmosphere of cold dignity, of ancient manners, of 
a vanished age, the air of which seemed devotional.

Opposite the armchair, however, in which the count's mother had 
died--a square armchair of formal design and inhospitable padding, 
which stood by the hearthside--the Countess Sabine was seated in a 
deep and cozy lounge, the red silk upholsteries of which were soft 
as eider down.  It was the only piece of modern furniture there, a 
fanciful item introduced amid the prevailing severity and clashing 
with it.

"So we shall have the shah of Persia," the young woman was saying.

They were talking of the crowned heads who were coming to Paris for 
the exhibition.  Several ladies had formed a circle round the 
hearth, and Mme du Joncquoy, whose brother, a diplomat, had just 
fulfilled a mission in the East, was giving some details about the 
court of Nazr-ed-Din.

"Are you out of sorts, my dear?" asked Mme Chantereau, the wife of 
an ironmaster, seeing the countess shivering slightly and growing 
pale as she did so.

"Oh no, not at all," replied the latter, smiling.  "I felt a little 
cold.  This drawing room takes so long to warm."

And with that she raised her melancholy eyes and scanned the walls 
from floor to ceiling.  Her daughter Estelle, a slight, insignificant-
looking girl of sixteen, the thankless period of life, quitted 
the large footstool on which she was sitting and silently came 
and propped up one of the logs which had rolled from its place.  
But Mme de Chezelles, a convent friend of Sabine's and her junior by 
five years, exclaimed:

"Dear me, I would gladly be possessed of a drawing room such as 
yours!  At any rate, you are able to receive visitors.  They only 
build boxes nowadays.  Oh, if I were in your place!"

She ran giddily on and with lively gestures explained how she would 
alter the hangings, the seats--everything, in fact.  Then she would 
give balls to which all Paris should run.  Behind her seat her 
husband, a magistrate, stood listening with serious air.  It was 
rumored that she deceived him quite openly, but people pardoned her 
offense and received her just the same, because, they said, "she's 
not answerable for her actions."

"Oh that Leonide!" the Countess Sabine contented herself by 
murmuring, smiling her faint smile the while.

With a languid movement she eked out the thought that was in her.  
After having lived there seventeen years she certainly would not 
alter her drawing room now.  It would henceforth remain just such as 
her mother-in-law had wished to preserve it during her lifetime.  
Then returning to the subject of conversation:

"I have been assured," she said, "that we shall also have the king 
of Prussia and the emperor of Russia."

'Yes, some very fine fetes are promised," said Mme du Joncquoy.

The banker Steiner, not long since introduced into this circle by 
Leonide de Chezelles, who was acquainted with the whole of Parisian 
society, was sitting chatting on a sofa between two of the windows.  
He was questioning a deputy, from whom he was endeavoring with much 
adroitness to elicit news about a movement on the stock exchange of 
which he had his suspicions, while the Count Muffat, standing in 
front of them, was silently listening to their talk, looking, as he 
did so, even grayer than was his wont.

Four or five young men formed another group near the door round the 
Count Xavier de Vandeuvres, who in a low tone was telling them an 
anecdote.  It was doubtless a very risky one, for they were choking 
with laughter.  Companionless in the center of the room, a stout 
man, a chief clerk at the Ministry of the Interior, sat heavily in 
an armchair, dozing with his eyes open.  But when one of the young 
men appeared to doubt the truth of the anecdote Vandeuvres raised 
his voice.

"You are too much of a skeptic, Foucarmont; you'll spoil all your 
pleasures that way."

And he returned to the ladies with a laugh.  Last scion of a great 
family, of feminine manners and witty tongue, he was at that time 
running through a fortune with a rage of life and appetite which 
nothing could appease.  His racing stable, which was one of the best 
known in Paris, cost him a fabulous amount of money; his betting 
losses at the Imperial Club amounted monthly to an alarming number 
of pounds, while taking one year with another, his mistresses would 
be always devouring now a farm, now some acres of arable land or 
forest, which amounted, in fact, to quite a respectable slice of his 
vast estates in Picardy.

"I advise you to call other people skeptics!  Why, you don't believe 
a thing yourself," said Leonide, making shift to find him a little 
space in which to sit down at her side.

"It's you who spoil your own pleasures."

"Exactly," he replied.  "I wish to make others benefit by my 
experience."

But the company imposed silence on him: he was scandalizing M. 
Venot.  And, the ladies having changed their positions, a little old 
man of sixty, with bad teeth and a subtle smile, became visible in 
the depths of an easy chair.  There he sat as comfortably as in his 
own house, listening to everybody's remarks and making none himself.  
With a slight gesture he announced himself by no means scandalized.  
Vandeuvres once more assumed his dignified bearing and added 
gravely:

"Monsieur Venot is fully aware that I believe what it is one's duty 
to believe."

It was an act of faith, and even Leonide appeared satisfied.  The 
young men at the end of the room no longer laughed; the company were 
old fogies, and amusement was not to be found there.  A cold breath 
of wind had passed over them, and amid the ensuing silence Steiner's 
nasal voice became audible.  The deputy's discreet answers were at 
last driving him to desperation.  For a second or two the Countess 
Sabine looked at the fire; then she resumed the conversation.

"I saw the king of Prussia at Baden-Baden last year.  He's still 
full of vigor for his age."

"Count Bismarck is to accompany him," said Mme du Joncquoy.  "Do you 
know the count?  I lunched with him at my brother's ages ago, when 
he was representative of Prussia in Paris.  There's a man now whose 
latest successes I cannot in the least understand."

"But why?" asked Mme Chantereau.

"Good gracious, how am I to explain?  He doesn't please me.  His 
appearance is boorish and underbred.  Besides, so far as I am 
concerned, I find him stupid."

With that the whole room spoke of Count Bismarck, and opinions 
differed considerably.  Vandeuvres knew him and assured the company 
that he was great in his cups and at play.  But when the discussion 
was at its height the door was opened, and Hector de la Falois made 
his appearance.  Fauchery, who followed in his wake, approached the 
countess and, bowing:

"Madame," he said, "I have not forgotten your extremely kind 
invitation."

She smiled and made a pretty little speech.  The journalist, after 
bowing to the count, stood for some moments in the middle of the 
drawing room.  He only recognized Steiner and accordingly looked 
rather out of his element.  But Vandeuvres turned and came and shook 
hands with him.  And forthwith, in his delight at the meeting and 
with a sudden desire to be confidential, Fauchery buttonholed him 
and said in a low voice:

"It's tomorrow.  Are you going?"

"Egad, yes."

"At midnight, at her house.

"I know, I know.  I'm going with Blanche."

He wanted to escape and return to the ladies in order to urge yet 
another reason in M. de Bismarck's favor.  But Fauchery detained 
him.

"You never will guess whom she has charged me to invite."

And with a slight nod he indicated Count Muffat, who was just then 
discussing a knotty point in the budget with Steiner and the deputy.

"It's impossible," said Vandeuvres, stupefaction and merriment in 
his tones.  "My word on it!  I had to swear that I would bring him 
to her.  Indeed, that's one of my reasons for coming here."

Both laughed silently, and Vandeuvres, hurriedly rejoining the 
circle of ladies, cried out:

"I declare that on the contrary Monsieur de Bismarck is exceedingly 
witty.  For instance, one evening he said a charmingly epigrammatic 
thing in my presence."

La Faloise meanwhile had heard the few rapid sentences thus 
whisperingly interchanged, and he gazed at Fauchery in hopes of an 
explanation which was not vouchsafed him.  Of whom were they 
talking, and what were they going to do at midnight tomorrow?  He 
did not leave his cousin's side again.  The latter had gone and 
seated himself.  He was especially interested by the Countess 
Sabine.  Her name had often been mentioned in his presence, and he 
knew that, having been married at the age of seventeen, she must now 
be thirty-four and that since her marriage she had passed a 
cloistered existence with her husband and her mother-in-law.  In 
society some spoke of her as a woman of religious chastity, while 
others pitied her and recalled to memory her charming bursts of 
laughter and the burning glances of her great eyes in the days prior 
to her imprisonment in this old town house.  Fauchery scrutinized 
her and yet hesitated.  One of his friends, a captain who had 
recently died in Mexico, had, on the very eve of his departure, made 
him one of those gross postprandial confessions, of which even the 
most prudent among men are occasionally guilty.  But of this he only 
retained a vague recollection; they had dined not wisely but too 
well that evening, and when he saw the countess, in her black dress 
and with her quiet smile, seated in that Old World drawing room, he 
certainly had his doubts.  A lamp which had been placed behind her 
threw into clear relief her dark, delicate, plump side face, wherein 
a certain heaviness in the contours of the mouth alone indicated a 
species of imperious sensuality.

"What do they want with their Bismarck?" muttered La Faloise, whose 
constant pretense it was to be bored in good society.  "One's ready 
to kick the bucket here.  A pretty idea of yours it was to want to 
come!"

Fauchery questioned him abruptly.

"Now tell me, does the countess admit someone to her embraces?"

"Oh dear, no, no!  My dear fellow!" he stammered, manifestly taken 
aback and quite forgetting his pose.  "Where d'you think we are?"

After which he was conscious of a want of up-to-dateness in this 
outburst of indignation and, throwing himself back on a great sofa, 
he added:

"Gad!  I say no!  But I don't know much about it.  There's a little 
chap out there, Foucarmont they call him, who's to be met with 
everywhere and at every turn.  One's seen faster men than that, 
though, you bet.  However, it doesn't concern me, and indeed, all I 
know is that if the countess indulges in high jinks she's still 
pretty sly about it, for the thing never gets about--nobody talks."

Then although Fauchery did not take the trouble to question him, he 
told him all he knew about the Muffats.  Amid the conversation of 
the ladies, which still continued in front of the hearth, they both 
spoke in subdued tones, and, seeing them there with their white 
cravats and gloves, one might have supposed them to be discussing in 
chosen phraseology some really serious topic.  Old Mme Muffat then, 
whom La Faloise had been well acquainted with, was an insufferable 
old lady, always hand in glove with the priests.  She had the grand 
manner, besides, and an authoritative way of comporting herself, 
which bent everybody to her will.  As to Muffat, he was an old man's 
child; his father, a general, had been created count by Napoleon I, 
and naturally he had found himself in favor after the second of 
December.  He hadn't much gaiety of manner either, but he passed for 
a very honest man of straightforward intentions and understanding.  
Add to these a code of old aristocratic ideas and such a lofty 
conception of his duties at court, of his dignities and of his 
virtues, that he behaved like a god on wheels.  It was the Mamma 
Muffat who had given him this precious education with its daily 
visits to the confessional, its complete absence of escapades and of 
all that is meant by youth.  He was a practicing Christian and had 
attacks of faith of such fiery violence that they might be likened 
to accesses of burning fever.  Finally, in order to add a last touch 
to the picture, La Faloise whispered something in his cousin's ear.

"You don't say so!" said the latter.

"On my word of honor, they swore it was true!  He was still like 
that when he married."

Fauchery chuckled as he looked at the count, whose face, with its 
fringe of whiskers and absence of mustaches, seemed to have grown 
squarer and harder now that he was busy quoting figures to the 
writhing, struggling Steiner.

"My word, he's got a phiz for it!" murmured Fauchery.  "A pretty 
present he made his wife!  Poor little thing, how he must have bored 
her!  She knows nothing about anything, I'll wager!"

Just then the Countess Sabine was saying something to him.  But he 
did not hear her, so amusing and extraordinary did he esteem the 
Muffats' case.  She repeated the question.

"Monsieur Fauchery, have you not published a sketch of Monsieur de 
Bismarck?  You spoke with him once?"

He got up briskly and approached the circle of ladies, endeavoring 
to collect himself and soon with perfect ease of manner finding an 
answer:

"Dear me, madame, I assure you I wrote that 'portrait' with the help 
of biographies which had been published in Germany.  I have never 
seen Monsieur de Bismarck."

He remained beside the countess and, while talking with her, 
continued his meditations.  She did not look her age; one would have 
set her down as being twenty-eight at most, for her eyes, above all, 
which were filled with the dark blue shadow of her long eyelashes, 
retained the glowing light of youth.  Bred in a divided family, so 
that she used to spend one month with the Marquis de Chouard, 
another with the marquise, she had been married very young, urged 
on, doubtless, by her father, whom she embarrassed after her 
mother's death.  A terrible man was the marquis, a man about whom 
strange tales were beginning to be told, and that despite his lofty 
piety!  Fauchery asked if he should have the honor of meeting him.  
Certainly her father was coming, but only very late; he had so much 
work on hand!  The journalist thought he knew where the old 
gentleman passed his evenings and looked grave.  But a mole, which 
he noticed close to her mouth on the countess's left cheek, 
surprised him.  Nana had precisely the same mole.  It was curious.  
Tiny hairs curled up on it, only they were golden in Nana's case, 
black as jet in this.  Ah well, never mind!  This woman enjoyed 
nobody's embraces.

"I have always felt a wish to know Queen Augusta," she said.  "They 
say she is so good, so devout.  Do you think she will accompany the 
king?"

"It is not thought that she will, madame," he replied.

She had no lovers: the thing was only too apparent.  One had only to 
look at her there by the side of that daughter of hers, sitting so 
insignificant and constrained on her footstool.  That sepulchral 
drawing room of hers, which exhaled odors suggestive of being in a 
church, spoke as plainly as words could of the iron hand, the 
austere mode of existence, that weighed her down.  There was nothing 
suggestive of her own personality in that ancient abode, black with 
the damps of years.  It was Muffat who made himself felt there, who 
dominated his surroundings with his devotional training, his 
penances and his fasts.  But the sight of the little old gentleman 
with the black teeth and subtle smile whom he suddenly discovered in 
his armchair behind the group of ladies afforded him a yet more 
decisive argument.  He knew the personage.  It was Theophile Venot, 
a retired lawyer who had made a specialty of church cases.  He had 
left off practice with a handsome fortune and was now leading a 
sufficiently mysterious existence, for he was received everywhere, 
treated with great deference and even somewhat feared, as though he 
had been the representative of a mighty force, an occult power, 
which was felt to be at his back.  Nevertheless, his behavior was 
very humble.  He was churchwarden at the Madeleine Church and had 
simply accepted the post of deputy mayor at the town house of the 
Ninth Arrondissement in order, as he said, to have something to do 
in his leisure time.  Deuce take it, the countess was well guarded; 
there was nothing to be done in that quarter.

"You're right, it's enough to make one kick the bucket here," said 
Fauchery to his cousin when he had made good his escape from the 
circle of ladies.  "We'll hook it!"

But Steiner, deserted at last by the Count Muffat and the deputy, 
came up in a fury.  Drops of perspiration stood on his forehead, and 
he grumbled huskily:

"Gad!  Let 'em tell me nothing, if nothing they want to tell me.  I 
shall find people who will talk."

Then he pushed the journalist into a corner and, altering his tone, 
said in accents of victory:

"It's tomorrow, eh?  I'm of the party, my bully!"

"Indeed!" muttered Fauchery with some astonishment.

"You didn't know about it.  Oh, I had lots of bother to find her at 
home.  Besides, Mignon never would leave me alone."

"But they're to be there, are the Mignons."

"Yes, she told me so.  In fact, she did receive my visit, and she 
invited me.  Midnight punctually, after the play."

The banker was beaming.  He winked and added with a peculiar 
emphasis on the words:

"You've worked it, eh?"

"Eh, what?" said Fauchery, pretending not to understand him.  "She 
wanted to thank me for my article, so she came and called on me."

"Yes, yes.  You fellows are fortunate.  You get rewarded.  By the 
by, who pays the piper tomorrow?"

The journalist made a slight outward movement with his arms, as 
though he would intimate that no one had ever been able to find out.  
But Vandeuvres called to Steiner, who knew M. de Bismarck.  Mme du 
Joncquoy had almost convinced herself of the truth of her 
suppositions; she concluded with these words:

"He gave me an unpleasant impression.  I think his face is evil.  
But I am quite willing to believe that he has a deal of wit.  It 
would account for his successes."

"Without doubt," said the banker with a faint smile.  He was a Jew 
from Frankfort.

Meanwhile La Faloise at last made bold to question his cousin.  He 
followed him up and got inside his guard:

"There's supper at a woman's tomorrow evening?  With which of them, 
eh?  With which of them?"

Fauchery motioned to him that they were overheard and must respect 
the conventions here.  The door had just been opened anew, and an 
old lady had come in, followed by a young man in whom the journalist 
recognized the truant schoolboy, perpetrator of the famous and as 
yet unforgotten "tres chic" of the Blonde Venus first night.  This 
lady's arrival caused a stir among the company.  The Countess Sabine 
had risen briskly from her seat in order to go and greet her, and 
she had taken both her hands in hers and addressed her as her "dear 
Madame Hugon."  Seeing that his cousin viewed this little episode 
with some curiosity, La Faloise sought to arouse his interest and in 
a few brief phrases explained the position.  Mme Hugon, widow of a 
notary, lived in retirement at Les Fondettes, an old estate of her 
family's in the neighborhood of Orleans, but she also kept up a 
small establishment in Paris in a house belonging to her in the Rue 
de Richelieu and was now passing some weeks there in order to settle 
her youngest son, who was reading the law and in his "first year."  
In old times she had been a dear friend of the Marquise de Chouard 
and had assisted at the birth of the countess, who, prior to her 
marriage, used to stay at her house for months at a time and even 
now was quite familiarly treated by her.

"I have brought Georges to see you," said Mme Hugon to Sabine.  
"He's grown, I trust."

The young man with his clear eyes and the fair curls which suggested 
a girl dressed up as a boy bowed easily to the countess and reminded 
her of a bout of battledore and shuttlecock they had had together 
two years ago at Les Fondettes.

"Philippe is not in Paris?" asked Count Muffat.

"Dear me, no!" replied the old lady.  "He is always in garrison at 
Bourges."  She had seated herself and began talking with 
considerable pride of her eldest son, a great big fellow who, after 
enlisting in a fit of waywardness, had of late very rapidly attained 
the rank of lieutenant.  All the ladies behaved to her with 
respectful sympathy, and conversation was resumed in a tone at once 
more amiable and more refined.  Fauchery, at sight of that 
respectable Mme Hugon, that motherly face lit up with such a kindly 
smile beneath its broad tresses of white hair, thought how foolish 
he had been to suspect the Countess Sabine even for an instant.

Nevertheless, the big chair with the red silk upholsteries in which 
the countess sat had attracted his attention.  Its style struck him 
as crude, not to say fantastically suggestive, in that dim old 
drawing room.  Certainly it was not the count who had inveigled 
thither that nest of voluptuous idleness.  One might have described 
it as an experiment, marking the birth of an appetite and of an 
enjoyment.  Then he forgot where he was, fell into brown study and 
in thought even harked back to that vague confidential announcement 
imparted to him one evening in the dining room of a restaurant.  
Impelled by a sort of sensuous curiosity, he had always wanted an 
introduction into the Muffats' circle, and now that his friend was 
in Mexico through all eternity, who could tell what might happen?  
"We shall see," he thought.  It was a folly, doubtless, but the idea 
kept tormenting him; he felt himself drawn on and his animal nature 
aroused.  The big chair had a rumpled look--its nether cushions had 
been tumbled, a fact which now amused him.

"Well, shall we be off?" asked La Faloise, mentally vowing that once 
outside he would find out the name of the woman with whom people 
were going to sup.

"All in good time," replied Fauchery.

But he was no longer in any hurry and excused himself on the score 
of the invitation he had been commissioned to give and had as yet 
not found a convenient opportunity to mention.  The ladies were 
chatting about an assumption of the veil, a very touching ceremony 
by which the whole of Parisian society had for the last three days 
been greatly moved.  It was the eldest daughter of the Baronne de 
Fougeray, who, under stress of an irresistible vocation, had just 
entered the Carmelite Convent.  Mme Chantereau, a distant cousin of 
the Fougerays, told how the baroness had been obliged to take to her 
bed the day after the ceremony, so overdone was she with weeping.

"I had a very good place," declared Leonide.  "I found it 
interesting."

Nevertheless, Mme Hugon pitied the poor mother.  How sad to lose a 
daughter in such a way!

"I am accused of being overreligious," she said in her quiet, frank 
manner, "but that does not prevent me thinking the children very 
cruel who obstinately commit such suicide."

"Yes, it's a terrible thing," murmured the countess, shivering a 
little, as became a chilly person, and huddling herself anew in the 
depths of her big chair in front of the fire.

Then the ladies fell into a discussion.  But their voices were 
discreetly attuned, while light trills of laughter now and again 
interrupted the gravity of their talk.  The two lamps on the chimney 
piece, which had shades of rose-colored lace, cast a feeble light 
over them while on scattered pieces of furniture there burned but 
three other lamps, so that the great drawing room remained in soft 
shadow.

Steiner was getting bored.  He was describing to Fauchery an 
escapade of that little Mme de Chezelles, whom he simply referred to 
as Leonide.  "A blackguard woman," he said, lowering his voice 
behind the ladies' armchairs.  Fauchery looked at her as she sat 
quaintly perched, in her voluminous ball dress of pale blue satin, 
on the corner of her armchair.  She looked as slight and impudent as 
a boy, and he ended by feeling astonished at seeing her there.  
People comported themselves better at Caroline Hequet's, whose 
mother had arranged her house on serious principles.  Here was a 
perfect subject for an article.  What a strange world was this world 
of Paris!  The most rigid circles found themselves invaded.  
Evidently that silent Theophile Venot, who contented himself by 
smiling and showing his ugly teeth, must have been a legacy from the 
late countess.  So, too, must have been such ladies of mature age as 
Mme Chantereau and Mme du Joncquoy, besides four or five old 
gentlemen who sat motionless in corners.  The Count Muffat attracted 
to the house a series of functionaries, distinguished by the 
immaculate personal appearance which was at that time required of 
the men at the Tuileries.  Among others there was the chief clerk, 
who still sat solitary in the middle of the room with his closely 
shorn cheeks, his vacant glance and his coat so tight of fit that he 
could scarce venture to move.  Almost all the young men and certain 
individuals with distinguished, aristocratic manners were the 
Marquis de Chouard's contribution to the circle, he having kept 
touch with the Legitimist party after making his peace with the 
empire on his entrance into the Council of State.  There remained 
Leonide de Chezelles and Steiner, an ugly little knot against which 
Mme Hugon's elderly and amiable serenity stood out in strange 
contrast.  And Fauchery, having sketched out his article, named this 
last group "Countess Sabine's little clique."

"On another occasion," continued Steiner in still lower tones, 
"Leonide got her tenor down to Montauban.  She was living in the 
Chateau de Beaurecueil, two leagues farther off, and she used to 
come in daily in a carriage and pair in order to visit him at the 
Lion d'Or, where he had put up.  The carriage used to wait at the 
door, and Leonide would stay for hours in the house, while a crowd 
gathered round and looked at the horses."

There was a pause in the talk, and some solemn moments passed 
silently by in the lofty room.  Two young men were whispering, but 
they ceased in their turn, and the hushed step of Count Muffat was 
alone audible as he crossed the floor.  The lamps seemed to have 
paled; the fire was going out; a stern shadow fell athwart the old 
friends of the house where they sat in the chairs they had occupied 
there for forty years back.  It was as though in a momentary pause 
of conversation the invited guests had become suddenly aware that 
the count's mother, in all her glacial stateliness, had returned 
among them.

But the Countess Sabine had once more resumed:

"Well, at last the news of it got about.  The young man was likely 
to die, and that would explain the poor child's adoption of the 
religious life.  Besides, they say that Monsieur de Fougeray would 
never have given his consent to the marriage."

"They say heaps of other things too," cried Leonide giddily.

She fell a-laughing; she refused to talk.  Sabine was won over by 
this gaiety and put her handkerchief up to her lips.  And in the 
vast and solemn room their laughter sounded a note which struck 
Fauchery strangely, the note of delicate glass breaking.  Assuredly 
here was the first beginning of the "little rift."  Everyone began 
talking again.  Mme du Joncquoy demurred; Mme Chantereau knew for 
certain that a marriage had been projected but that matters had gone 
no further; the men even ventured to give their opinions.  For some 
minutes the conversation was a babel of opinions, in which the 
divers elements of the circle, whether Bonapartist or Legitimist or 
merely worldly and skeptical, appeared to jostle one another 
simultaneously.  Estelle had rung to order wood to be put on the 
fire; the footman turned up the lamps; the room seemed to wake from 
sleep.  Fauchery began smiling, as though once more at his ease.

"Egad, they become the brides of God when they couldn't be their 
cousin's," said Vandeuvres between his teeth.

The subject bored him, and he had rejoined Fauchery.

"My dear fellow, have you ever seen a woman who was really loved 
become a nun?"

He did not wait for an answer, for he had had enough of the topic, 
and in a hushed voice:

"Tell me," he said, "how many of us will there be tomorrow?  
There'll be the Mignons, Steiner, yourself, Blanche and I; who 
else?"

"Caroline, I believe, and Simonne and Gaga without doubt.  One never 
knows exactly, does one?  On such occasions one expects the party 
will number twenty, and you're really thirty."

Vandeuvres, who was looking at the ladies, passed abruptly to 
another subject:

"She must have been very nice-looking, that Du Joncquoy woman, some 
fifteen years ago.  Poor Estelle has grown lankier than ever.  What 
a nice lath to put into a bed!"

But interrupting himself, he returned to the subject of tomorrow's 
supper.

"What's so tiresome of those shows is that it's always the same set 
of women.  One wants a novelty.  Do try and invent a new girl.  By 
Jove, happy thought!  I'll go and beseech that stout man to bring 
the woman he was trotting about the other evening at the Varietes."

He referred to the chief clerk, sound asleep in the middle of the 
drawing room.  Fauchery, afar off, amused himself by following this 
delicate negotiation.  Vandeuvres had sat himself down by the stout 
man, who still looked very sedate.  For some moments they both 
appeared to be discussing with much propriety the question before 
the house, which was, "How can one discover the exact state of 
feeling that urges a young girl to enter into the religious life?"  
Then the count returned with the remark:

"It's impossible.  He swears she's straight.  She'd refuse, and yet 
I would have wagered that I once saw her at Laure's."

"Eh, what?  You go to Laure's?" murmured Fauchery with a chuckle.  
"You venture your reputation in places like that?  I was under the 
impression that it was only we poor devils of outsiders who--"

"Ah, dear boy, one ought to see every side of life."

Then they sneered and with sparkling eyes they compared notes about 
the table d'hote in the Rue des Martyrs, where big Laure Piedefer 
ran a dinner at three francs a head for little women in 
difficulties.  A nice hole, where all the little women used to kiss 
Laure on the lips!  And as the Countess Sabine, who had overheard a 
stray word or two, turned toward them, they started back, rubbing 
shoulders in excited merriment.  They had not noticed that Georges 
Hugon was close by and that he was listening to them, blushing so 
hotly the while that a rosy flush had spread from his ears to his 
girlish throat.  The infant was full of shame and of ecstasy.  From 
the moment his mother had turned him loose in the room he had been 
hovering in the wake of Mme de Chezelles, the only woman present who 
struck him as being the thing.  But after all is said and done, Nana 
licked her to fits!

"Yesterday evening," Mme Hugon was saying, "Georges took me to the 
play.  Yes, we went to the Varietes, where I certainly had not set 
foot for the last ten years.  That child adores music.  As to me, I 
wasn't in the least amused, but he was so happy!  They put 
extraordinary pieces on the stage nowadays.  Besides, music delights 
me very little, I confess."

"What!  You don't love music, madame?" cried Mme du Joncquoy, 
lifting her eyes to heaven.  "Is it possible there should be people 
who don't love music?"

The exclamation of surprise was general.  No one had dropped a 
single word concerning the performance at the Varietes, at which the 
good Mme Hugon had not understood any of the allusions.  The ladies 
knew the piece but said nothing about it, and with that they plunged 
into the realm of sentiment and began discussing the masters in a 
tone of refined and ecstatical admiration.  Mme du Joncquoy was not 
fond of any of them save Weber, while Mme Chantereau stood up for 
the Italians.  The ladies' voices had turned soft and languishing, 
and in front of the hearth one might have fancied one's self 
listening in meditative, religious retirement to the faint, discreet 
music of a little chapel.

"Now let's see," murmured Vandeuvres, bringing Fauchery back into 
the middle of the drawing room, "notwithstanding it all, we must 
invent a woman for tomorrow.  Shall we ask Steiner about it?"

"Oh, when Steiner's got hold of a woman," said the journalist, "it's 
because Paris has done with her."

Vandeuvres, however, was searching about on every side.

"Wait a bit," he continued, "the other day I met Foucarmont with a 
charming blonde.  I'll go and tell him to bring her."

And he called to Foucarmont.  They exchanged a few words rapidly.  
There must have been some sort of complication, for both of them, 
moving carefully forward and stepping over the dresses of the 
ladies, went off in quest of another young man with whom they 
continued the discussion in the embrasure of a window.  Fauchery was 
left to himself and had just decided to proceed to the hearth, where 
Mme du Joncquoy was announcing that she never heard Weber played 
without at the same time seeing lakes, forests and sunrises over 
landscapes steeped in dew, when a hand touched his shoulder and a 
voice behind him remarked:

"It's not civil of you."

"What d'you mean?" he asked, turning round and recognizing La 
Faloise.

"Why, about that supper tomorrow.  You might easily have got me 
invited."

Fauchery was at length about to state his reasons when Vandeuvres 
came back to tell him:

"It appears it isn't a girl of Foucarmont's.  It's that man's flame 
out there.  She won't be able to come.  What a piece of bad luck!  
But all the same I've pressed Foucarmont into the service, and he's 
going to try to get Louise from the Palais-Royal."

"Is it not true, Monsieur de Vandeuvres," asked Mme Chantereau, 
raising her voice, "that Wagner's music was hissed last Sunday?"

"Oh, frightfully, madame," he made answer, coming forward with his 
usual exquisite politeness.

Then, as they did not detain him, he moved off and continued 
whispering in the journalist's ear:

"I'm going to press some more of them.  These young fellows must 
know some little ladies."

With that he was observed to accost men and to engage them in 
conversation in his usual amiable and smiling way in every corner of 
the drawing room.  He mixed with the various groups, said something 
confidently to everyone and walked away again with a sly wink and a 
secret signal or two.  It looked as though he were giving out a 
watchword in that easy way of his.  The news went round; the place 
of meeting was announced, while the ladies' sentimental 
dissertations on music served to conceal the small, feverish rumor 
of these recruiting operations.

"No, do not speak of your Germans," Mme Chantereau was saying.  
"Song is gaiety; song is light.  Have you heard Patti in the Barber 
of Seville?"

"She was delicious!" murmured Leonide, who strummed none but 
operatic airs on her piano.

Meanwhile the Countess Sabine had rung.  When on Tuesdays the number 
of visitors was small, tea was handed round the drawing room itself.  
While directing a footman to clear a round table the countess 
followed the Count de Vandeuvres with her eyes.  She still smiled 
that vague smile which slightly disclosed her white teeth, and as 
the count passed she questioned him.

"What ARE you plotting, Monsieur de Vandeuvres?"

"What am I plotting, madame?" he answered quietly.  "Nothing at 
all."

"Really!  I saw you so busy.  Pray, wait, you shall make yourself 
useful!"

She placed an album in his hands and asked him to put it on the 
piano.  But he found means to inform Fauchery in a low whisper that 
they would have Tatan Nene, the most finely developed girl that 
winter, and Maria Blond, the same who had just made her first 
appearance at the Folies-Dramatiques.  Meanwhile La Faloise stopped 
him at every step in hopes of receiving an invitation.  He ended by 
offering himself, and Vandeuvres engaged him in the plot at once; 
only he made him promise to bring Clarisse with him, and when La 
Faloise pretended to scruple about certain points he quieted him by 
the remark:

"Since I invite you that's enough!"

Nevertheless, La Faloise would have much liked to know the name of 
the hostess.  But the countess had recalled Vandeuvres and was 
questioning him as to the manner in which the English made tea.  He 
often betook himself to England, where his horses ran.  Then as 
though he had been inwardly following up quite a laborious train of 
thought during his remarks, he broke in with the question:

"And the marquis, by the by?  Are we not to see him?"

"Oh, certainly you will!  My father made me a formal promise that he 
would come," replied the countess.  "But I'm beginning to be 
anxious.  His duties will have kept him."

Vandeuvres smiled a discreet smile.  He, too, seemed to have his 
doubts as to the exact nature of the Marquis de Chouard's duties.  
Indeed, he had been thinking of a pretty woman whom the marquis 
occasionally took into the country with him.  Perhaps they could get 
her too.

In the meantime Fauchery decided that the moment had come in which 
to risk giving Count Muff  his invitation.  The evening, in fact, 
was drawing to a close.

"Are you serious?" asked Vandeuvres, who thought a joke was 
intended.

"Extremely serious.  If I don't execute my commission she'll tear my 
eyes out.  It's a case of landing her fish, you know."

"Well then, I'll help you, dear boy."

Eleven o'clock struck.  Assisted by her daughter, the countess was 
pouring out the tea, and as hardly any guests save intimate friends 
had come, the cups and the platefuls of little cakes were being 
circulated without ceremony.  Even the ladies did not leave their 
armchairs in front of the fire and sat sipping their tea and 
nibbling cakes which they held between their finger tips.  From 
music the talk had declined to purveyors.  Boissier was the only 
person for sweetmeats and Catherine for ices.  Mme Chantereau, 
however, was all for Latinville.  Speech grew more and more 
indolent, and a sense of lassitude was lulling the room to sleep.  
Steiner had once more set himself secretly to undermine the deputy, 
whom he held in a state of blockade in the corner of a settee.  M. 
Venot, whose teeth must have been ruined by sweet things, was eating 
little dry cakes, one after the other, with a small nibbling sound 
suggestive of a mouse, while the chief clerk, his nose in a teacup, 
seemed never to be going to finish its contents.  As to the 
countess, she went in a leisurely way from one guest to another, 
never pressing them, indeed, only pausing a second or two before the 
gentlemen whom she viewed with an air of dumb interrogation before 
she smiled and passed on.  The great fire had flushed all her face, 
and she looked as if she were the sister of her daughter, who 
appeared so withered and ungainly at her side.  When she drew near 
Fauchery, who was chatting with her husband and Vandeuvres, she 
noticed that they grew suddenly silent; accordingly she did not stop 
but handed the cup of tea she was offering to Georges Hugon beyond 
them.

"It's a lady who desires your company at supper," the journalist 
gaily continued, addressing Count Muffat.

The last-named, whose face had worn its gray look all the evening, 
seemed very much surprised.  What lady was it?

"Oh, Nana!" said Vandeuvres, by way of forcing the invitation.

The count became more grave than before.  His eyelids trembled just 
perceptibly, while a look of discomfort, such as headache produces, 
hovered for a moment athwart his forehead.

"But I'm not acquainted with that lady," he murmured.

"Come, come, you went to her house," remarked Vandeuvres.

"What d'you say?  I went to her house?  Oh yes, the other day, in 
behalf of the Benevolent Organization.  I had forgotten about it.  
But, no matter, I am not acquainted with her, and I cannot accept."

He had adopted an icy expression in order to make them understand 
that this jest did not appear to him to be in good taste.  A man of 
his position did not sit down at tables of such women as that.  
Vandeuvres protested: it was to be a supper party of dramatic and 
artistic people, and talent excused everything.  But without 
listening further to the arguments urged by Fauchery, who spoke of a 
dinner where the Prince of Scots, the son of a queen, had sat down 
beside an ex-music-hall singer, the count only emphasized his 
refusal.  In so doing, he allowed himself, despite his great 
politeness, to be guilty of an irritated gesture.

Georges and La Faloise, standing in front of each other drinking 
their tea, had overheard the two or three phrases exchanged in their 
immediate neighborhood.

"Jove, it's at Nana's then," murmured La Faloise.  "I might have 
expected as much!"

Georges said nothing, but he was all aflame.  His fair hair was in 
disorder; his blue eyes shone like tapers, so fiercely had the vice, 
which for some days past had surrounded him, inflamed and stirred 
his blood.  At last he was going to plunge into all that he had 
dreamed of!

"I don't know the address," La Faloise resumed.

"She lives on a third floor in the Boulevard Haussmann, between the 
Rue de l'Arcade and the Rue Pesquier," said Georges all in a breath.

And when the other looked at him in much astonishment, he added, 
turning very red and fit to sink into the ground with embarrassment 
and conceit:

"I'm of the party.  She invited me this morning."

But there was a great stir in the drawing room, and Vandeuvres and 
Fauchery could not continue pressing the count.  The Marquis de 
Chouard had just come in, and everyone was anxious to greet him.  He 
had moved painfully forward, his legs failing under him, and he now 
stood in the middle of the room with pallid face and eyes blinking, 
as though he had just come out of some dark alley and were blinded 
by the brightness of the lamps.

"I scarcely hoped to see you tonight, Father," said the countess.  
"I should have been anxious till the morning."

He looked at her without answering, as a man might who fails to 
understand.  His nose, which loomed immense on his shorn face, 
looked like a swollen pimple, while his lower lip hung down.  Seeing 
him such a wreck, Mme Hugon, full of kind compassion, said pitying 
things to him.

"You work too hard.  You ought to rest yourself.  At our age we 
ought to leave work to the young people."

"Work!  Ah yes, to be sure, work!" he stammered at last.  "Always 
plenty of work."

He began to pull himself together, straightening up his bent figure 
and passing his hand, as was his wont, over his scant gray hair, of 
which a few locks strayed behind his ears.

"At what are you working as late as this?" asked Mme du Joncquoy.  
"I thought you were at the financial minister's reception?"

But the countess intervened with:

"My father had to study the question of a projected law."

"Yes, a projected law," he said; "exactly so, a projected law.  I 
shut myself up for that reason.  It refers to work in factories, and 
I was anxious for a proper observance of the Lord's day of rest.  It 
is really shameful that the government is unwilling to act with 
vigor in the matter.  Churches are growing empty; we are running 
headlong to ruin."

Vandeuvres had exchanged glances with Fauchery.  They both happened 
to be behind the marquis, and they were scanning him suspiciously.  
When Vandeuvres found an opportunity to take him aside and to speak 
to him about the good-looking creature he was in the habit of taking 
down into the country, the old man affected extreme surprise.  
Perhaps someone had seen him with the Baroness Decker, at whose 
house at Viroflay he sometimes spent a day or so.  Vandeuvres's sole 
vengeance was an abrupt question:

"Tell me, where have you been straying to?  Your elbow is covered 
with cobwebs and plaster."

"My elbow," he muttered, slightly disturbed.  "Yes indeed, it's 
true.  A speck or two, I must have come in for them on my way down 
from my office."

Several people were taking their departure.  It was close on 
midnight.  Two footmen were noiselessly removing the empty cups and 
the plates with cakes.  In front of the hearth the ladies had re-
formed and, at the same time, narrowed their circle and were 
chatting more carelessly than before in the languid atmosphere 
peculiar to the close of a party.  The very room was going to sleep, 
and slowly creeping shadows were cast by its walls.  It was then 
Fauchery spoke of departure.  Yet he once more forgot his intention 
at sight of the Countess Sabine.  She was resting from her cares as 
hostess, and as she sat in her wonted seat, silent, her eyes fixed 
on a log which was turning into embers, her face appeared so white 
and so impassable that doubt again possessed him.  In the glow of 
the fire the small black hairs on the mole at the corner of her lip 
became white.  It was Nana's very mole, down to the color of the 
hair.  He could not refrain from whispering something about it in 
Vandeuvres's ear.  Gad, it was true; the other had never noticed it 
before.  And both men continued this comparison of Nana and the 
countess.  They discovered a vague resemblance about the chin and 
the mouth, but the eyes were not at all alike.  Then, too, Nana had 
a good-natured expression, while with the countess it was hard to 
decide--she might have been a cat, sleeping with claws withdrawn and 
paws stirred by a scarce-perceptible nervous quiver.

"All the same, one could have her," declared Fauchery.

Vandeuvres stripped her at a glance.

"Yes, one could, all the same," he said.  "But I think nothing of 
the thighs, you know.  Will you bet she has no thighs?"

He stopped, for Fauchery touched him briskly on the arm and showed 
him Estelle, sitting close to them on her footstool.  They had 
raised their voices without noticing her, and she must have 
overheard them.  Nevertheless, she continued sitting there stiff and 
motionless, not a hair having lifted on her thin neck, which was 
that of a girl who has shot up all too quickly.  Thereupon they 
retired three or four paces, and Vandeuvres vowed that the countess 
was a very honest woman.  Just then voices were raised in front of 
the hearth.  Mme du Joncquoy was saying:

"I was willing to grant you that Monsieur de Bismarck was perhaps a 
witty man.  Only, if you go as far as to talk of genius--"

The ladies had come round again to their earliest topic of 
conversation.

"What the deuce!  Still Monsieur de Bismarck!" muttered Fauchery.  
"This time I make my escape for good and all."

"Wait a bit," said Vandeuvres, "we must have a definite no from the 
count."

The Count Muffat was talking to his father-in-law and a certain 
serious-looking gentleman.  Vandeuvres drew him away and renewed the 
invitation, backing it up with the information that he was to be at 
the supper himself.  A man might go anywhere; no one could think of 
suspecting evil where at most there could only be curiosity.  The 
count listened to these arguments with downcast eyes and 
expressionless face.  Vandeuvres felt him to be hesitating when the 
Marquis de Chouard approached with a look of interrogation.  And 
when the latter was informed of the question in hand and Fauchery 
had invited him in his turn, he looked at his son-in-law furtively.  
There ensued an embarrassed silence, but both men encouraged one 
another and would doubtless have ended by accepting had not Count 
Muffat perceived M. Venot's gaze fixed upon him.  The little old man 
was no longer smiling; his face was cadaverous, his eyes bright and 
keen as steel.

'No," replied the count directly, in so decisive a tone that further 
insistence became impossible.

Then the marquis refused with even greater severity of expression.  
He talked morality.  The aristocratic classes ought to set a good 
example.  Fauchery smiled and shook hands with Vandeuvres.  He did 
not wait for him and took his departure immediately, for he was due 
at his newspaper office.

"At Nana's at midnight, eh?"

La Faloise retired too.  Steiner had made his bow to the countess.  
Other men followed them, and the same phrase went round--"At 
midnight, at Nana's"--as they went to get their overcoats in the 
anteroom.  Georges, who could not leave without his mother, had 
stationed himself at the door, where he gave the exact address.  
"Third floor, door on your left."  Yet before going out Fauchery 
gave a final glance.  Vandeuvres had again resumed his position 
among the ladies and was laughing with Leonide de Chezelles.  Count 
Muffat and the Marquis de Chouard were joining in the conversation, 
while the good Mme Hugon was falling asleep open-eyed.  Lost among 
the petticoats, M. Venot was his own small self again and smiled as 
of old.  Twelve struck slowly in the great solemn room.

"What--what do you mean?" Mme du Joncquoy resumed.  "You imagine 
that Monsieur de Bismarck will make war on us and beat us!  Oh, 
that's unbearable!"

Indeed, they were laughing round Mme Chantereau, who had just 
repeated an assertion she had heard made in Alsace, where her 
husband owned a foundry.

"We have the emperor, fortunately," said Count Muffat in his grave, 
official way.

It was the last phrase Fauchery was able to catch.  He closed the 
door after casting one more glance in the direction of the Countess 
Sabine.  She was talking sedately with the chief clerk and seemed to 
be interested in that stout individual's conversation.  Assuredly he 
must have been deceiving himself.  There was no "little rift" there 
at all.  It was a pity.

"You're not coming down then?" La Faloise shouted up to him from the 
entrance hall.

And out on the pavement, as they separated, they once more repeated:

"Tomorrow, at Nana's."



CHAPTER IV


Since morning Zoe had delivered up the flat to a managing man who 
had come from Brebant's with a staff of helpers and waiters.  
Brebant was to supply everything, from the supper, the plates and 
dishes, the glass, the linen, the flowers, down to the seats and 
footstools.  Nana could not have mustered a dozen napkins out of all 
her cupboards, and not having had time to get a proper outfit after 
her new start in life and scorning to go to the restaurant, she had 
decided to make the restaurant come to her.  It struck her as being 
more the thing.  She wanted to celebrate her great success as an 
actress with a supper which should set people talking.  As her 
dining room was too small, the manager had arranged the table in the 
drawing room, a table with twenty-five covers, placed somewhat close 
together.

"Is everything ready?" asked Nana when she returned at midnight.

"Oh! I don't know," replied Zoe roughly, looking beside herself with 
worry.  "The Lord be thanked, I don't bother about anything.  
They're making a fearful mess in the kitchen and all over the flat!  
I've had to fight my battles too.  The other two came again.  My 
eye!  I did just chuck 'em out!"

She referred, of course, to her employer's old admirers, the 
tradesman and the Walachian, to whom Nana, sure of her future and 
longing to shed her skin, as she phrased it, had decided to give the 
go-by.

"There are a couple of leeches for you!" she muttered.

"If they come back threaten to go to the police."

Then she called Daguenet and Georges, who had remained behind in the 
anteroom, where they were hanging up their overcoats.  They had both 
met at the stage door in the Passage des Panoramas, and she had 
brought them home with her in a cab.  As there was nobody there yet, 
she shouted to them to come into the dressing room while Zoe was 
touching up her toilet.  Hurriedly and without changing her dress 
she had her hair done up and stuck white roses in her chignon and at 
her bosom.  The little room was littered with the drawing-room 
furniture, which the workmen had been compelled to roll in there, 
and it was full of a motley assemblage of round tables, sofas and 
armchairs, with their legs in air for the most part.  Nana was quite 
ready when her dress caught on a castor and tore upward.  At this 
she swore furiously; such things only happened to her!  Ragingly she 
took off her dress, a very simple affair of white foulard, of so 
thin and supple a texture that it clung about her like a long shift.  
But she put it on again directly, for she could not find another to 
her taste, and with tears in her eyes declared that she was dressed 
like a ragpicker.  Daguenet and Georges had to patch up the rent 
with pins, while Zoe once more arranged her hair.  All three hurried 
round her, especially the boy, who knelt on the floor with his hands 
among her skirts.  And at last she calmed down again when Daguenet 
assured her it could not be later than a quarter past twelve, seeing 
that by dint of scamping her words and skipping her lines she had 
effectually shortened the third act of the Blonde Venus.

"The play's still far too good for that crowd of idiots," she said.  
"Did you see?  There were thousands there tonight.  Zoe, my girl, 
you will wait in here.  Don't go to bed, I shall want you.  By gum, 
it is time they came.  Here's company!"

She ran off while Georges stayed where he was with the skirts of his 
coat brushing the floor.  He blushed, seeing Daguenet looking at 
him.  Notwithstanding which, they had conceived a tender regard the 
one for the other.  They rearranged the bows of their cravats in 
front of the big dressing glass and gave each other a mutual dose of 
the clothesbrush, for they were all white from their close contact 
with Nana.

"One would think it was sugar," murmured Georges, giggling like a 
greedy little child.

A footman hired for the evening was ushering the guests into the 
small drawing room, a narrow slip of a place in which only four 
armchairs had been left in order the better to pack in the company.  
From the large drawing room beyond came a sound as of the moving of 
plates and silver, while a clear and brilliant ray of light shone 
from under the door.  At her entrance Nana found Clarisse Besnus, 
whom La Faloise had brought, already installed in one of the 
armchairs.

"Dear me, you're the first of 'em!" said Nana, who, now that she was 
successful, treated her familiarly.

"Oh, it's his doing," replied Clarisse.  "He's always afraid of not 
getting anywhere in time.  If I'd taken him at his word I shouldn't 
have waited to take off my paint and my wig."

The young man, who now saw Nana for the first time, bowed, paid her 
a compliment and spoke of his cousin, hiding his agitation behind an 
exaggeration of politeness.  But Nana, neither listening to him nor 
recognizing his face, shook hands with him and then went briskly 
toward Rose Mignon, with whom she at once assumed a most 
distinguished manner.

"Ah, how nice of you, my dear madame!  I was so anxious to have you 
here!"

"It's I who am charmed, I assure you," said Rose with equal 
amiability.

"Pray, sit down.  Do you require anything?"

"Thank you, no!  Ah yes, I've left my fan in my pelisse, Steiner; 
just look in the right-hand pocket."

Steiner and Mignon had come in behind Rose.  The banker turned back 
and reappeared with the fan while Mignon embraced Nana fraternally 
and forced Rose to do so also.  Did they not all belong to the same 
family in the theatrical world?  Then he winked as though to 
encourage Steiner, but the latter was disconcerted by Rose's clear 
gaze and contented himself by kissing Nana's hand.

Just then the Count de Vandeuvres made his appearance with Blanche 
de Sivry.  There was an interchange of profound bows, and Nana with 
the utmost ceremony conducted Blanche to an armchair.  Meanwhile 
Vandeuvres told them laughingly that Fauchery was engaged in a 
dispute at the foot of the stairs because the porter had refused to 
allow Lucy Stewart's carriage to come in at the gate.  They could 
hear Lucy telling the porter he was a dirty blackguard in the 
anteroom.  But when the footman had opened the door she came forward 
with her laughing grace of manner, announced her name herself, took 
both Nana's hands in hers and told her that she had liked her from 
the very first and considered her talent splendid.  Nana, puffed up 
by her novel role of hostess, thanked her and was veritably 
confused.  Nevertheless, from the moment of Fauchery's arrival she 
appeared preoccupied, and directly she could get near him she asked 
him in a low voice:

"Will he come?"

"No, he did not want to," was the journalist's abrupt reply, for he 
was taken by surprise, though he had got ready some sort of tale to 
explain Count Muffat's refusal.

Seeing the young woman's sudden pallor, he became conscious of his 
folly and tried to retract his words.

"He was unable to; he is taking the countess to the ball at the 
Ministry of the Interior tonight."

"All right," murmured Nana, who suspected him of ill will, "you'll 
pay me out for that, my pippin."

She turned on her heel, and so did he; they were angry.  Just then 
Mignon was pushing Steiner up against Nana, and when Fauchery had 
left her he said to her in a low voice and with the good-natured 
cynicism of a comrade in arms who wishes his friends to be happy:

"He's dying of it, you know, only he's afraid of my wife.  Won't you 
protect him?"

Nana did not appear to understand.  She smiled and looked at Rose, 
the husband and the banker and finally said to the latter:

"Monsieur Steiner, you will sit next to me."

With that there came from the anteroom a sound of laughter and 
whispering and a burst of merry, chattering voices, which sounded as 
if a runaway convent were on the premises.  And Labordette appeared, 
towing five women in his rear, his boarding school, as Lucy Stewart 
cruelly phrased it.  There was Gaga, majestic in a blue velvet dress 
which was too tight for her, and Caroline Hequet, clad as usual in 
ribbed black silk, trimmed with Chantilly lace.  Lea de Horn came 
next, terribly dressed up, as her wont was, and after her the big 
Tatan Nene, a good-humored fair girl with the bosom of a wet nurse, 
at which people laughed, and finally little Maria Blond, a young 
damsel of fifteen, as thin and vicious as a street child, yet on the 
high road to success, owing to her recent first appearance at the 
Folies.  Labordette had brought the whole collection in a single 
fly, and they were stlll laughing at the way they had been squeezed 
with Maria Blond on her knees.  But on entering the room they pursed 
up their lips, and all grew very conventional as they shook hands 
and exchanged salutations.  Gaga even affected the infantile and 
lisped through excess of genteel deportment.  Tatan Nene alone 
transgressed.  They had been telling her as they came along that six 
absolutely naked Negroes would serve up Nana's supper, and she now 
grew anxious about them and asked to see them.  Labordette called 
her a goose and besought her to be silent.

"And Bordenave?" asked Fauchery.

"Oh, you may imagine how miserable I am," cried Nana; "he won't be 
able to join us."

"Yes," said Rose Mignon, "his foot caught in a trap door, and he's 
got a fearful sprain.  If only you could hear him swearing, with his 
leg tied up and laid out on a chair!"

Thereupon everybody mourned over Bordenave's absence.  No one ever 
gave a good supper without Bordenave.  Ah well, they would try and 
do without him, and they were already talking about other matters 
when a burly voice was heard:

"What, eh, what?  Is that the way they're going to write my obituary 
notice?"

There was a shout, and all heads were turned round, for it was 
indeed Bordenave.  Huge and fiery-faced, he was standing with his 
stiff leg in the doorway, leaning for support on Simonne Cabiroche's 
shoulder.  Simonne was for the time being his mistress.  This little 
creature had had a certain amount of education and could play the 
piano and talk English.  She was a blonde on a tiny, pretty scale 
and so delicately formed that she seemed to bend under Bordenave's 
rude weight.  Yet she was smilingly submissive withal.  He postured 
there for some moments, for he felt that together they formed a 
tableau.

"One can't help liking ye, eh?" he continued.  "Zounds, I was afraid 
I should get bored, and I said to myself, 'Here goes.'"

But he interrupted himself with an oath.

"Oh, damn!"

Simonne had taken a step too quickly forward, and his foot had just 
felt his full weight.  He gave her a rough push, but she, still 
smiling away and ducking her pretty head as some animal might that 
is afraid of a beating, held him up with all the strength a little 
plump blonde can command.  Amid all these exclamations there was a 
rush to his assistance.  Nana and Rose Mignon rolled up an armchair, 
into which Bordenave let himself sink, while the other women slid a 
second one under his leg.  And with that all the actresses present 
kissed him as a matter of course.  He kept grumbling and gasping.

"Oh, damn!  Oh, damn!  Ah well, the stomach's unhurt, you'll see."

Other guests had arrived by this time, and motion became impossible 
in the room.  The noise of clinking plates and silver had ceased, 
and now a dispute was heard going on in the big drawing room, where 
the voice of the manager grumbled angrily.  Nana was growing 
impatient, for she expected no more invited guests and wondered why 
they did not bring in supper.  She had just sent Georges to find out 
what was going on when, to her great surprise, she noticed the 
arrival of more guests, both male and female.  She did not know them 
in the least.  Whereupon with some embarrassment she questioned 
Bordenave, Mignon and Labordette about them.  They did not know them 
any more than she did, but when she turned to the Count de 
Vandeuvres he seemed suddenly to recollect himself.  They were the 
young men he had pressed into her service at Count Muffat's.  Nana 
thanked him.  That was capital, capital!  Only they would all be 
terribly crowded, and she begged Labordette to go and have seven 
more covers set.  Scarcely had he left the room than the footman 
ushered in three newcomers.  Nay, this time the thing was becoming 
ridiculous; one certainly could never take them all in.  Nana was 
beginning to grow angry and in her haughtiest manner announced that 
such conduct was scarcely in good taste.  But seeing two more 
arrive, she began laughing; it was really too funny.  So much the 
worse.  People would have to fit in anyhow!  The company were all on 
their feet save Gaga and Rose and Bordenave, who alone took up two 
armchairs.  There was a buzz of voices, people talking in low tones 
and stifling slight yawns the while.

"Now what d'you say, my lass," asked Bordenave, "to our sitting down 
at table as if nothing had happened?  We are all here, don't you 
think?"

"Oh yes, we're all here, I promise you!" she answered laughingly.

She looked round her but grew suddenly serious, as though she were 
surprised at not finding someone.  Doubtless there was a guest 
missing whom she did not mention.  It was a case of waiting.  But a 
minute or two later the company noticed in their midst a tall 
gentleman with a fine face and a beautiful white beard.  The most 
astonishing thing about it was that nobody had seen him come in; 
indeed, he must have slipped into the little drawing room through 
the bedroom door, which had remained ajar.  Silence reigned, broken 
only by a sound of whispering.  The Count de Vandeuvres certainly 
knew who the gentleman was, for they both exchanged a discreet 
handgrip, but to the questions which the women asked him he replied 
by a smile only.  Thereupon Caroline Hequet wagered in a low voice 
that it was an English lord who was on the eve of returning to 
London to be married.  She knew him quite well--she had had him.  
And this account of the matter went the round of the ladies present, 
Maria Blond alone asserting that, for her part, she recognized a 
German ambassador.  She could prove it, because he often passed the 
night with one of her friends.  Among the men his measure was taken 
in a few rapid phrases.  A real swell, to judge by his looks!  
Perhaps he would pay for the supper!  Most likely.  It looked like 
it.  Bah!  Provided only the supper was a good one!  In the end the 
company remained undecided.  Nay, they were already beginning to 
forget the old white-bearded gentleman when the manager opened the 
door of the large drawing room.

"Supper is on the table, madame."

Nana had already accepted Steiner's proffered arm without noticing a 
movement on the part of the old gentleman, who started to walk 
behind her in solitary state.  Thus the march past could not be 
organized, and men and women entered anyhow, joking with homely good 
humor over this absence of ceremony.  A long table stretched from 
one end to the other of the great room, which had been entirely 
cleared of furniture, and this same table was not long enough, for 
the plates thereon were touching one another.  Four candelabra, with 
ten candles apiece, lit up the supper, and of these one was gorgeous 
in silver plate with sheaves of flowers to right and left of it.  
Everything was luxurious after the restaurant fashion; the china was 
ornamented with a gold line and lacked the customary monogram; the 
silver had become worn and tarnished through dint of continual 
washings; the glass was of the kind that you can complete an odd set 
of in any cheap emporium.

The scene suggested a premature housewarming in an establishment 
newly smiled on by fortune and as yet lacking the necessary 
conveniences.  There was no central luster, and the candelabra, 
whose tall tapers had scarcely burned up properly, cast a pale 
yellow light among the dishes and stands on which fruit, cakes and 
preserves alternated symmetrically.

"You sit where you like, you know," said Nana.  "It's more amusing 
that way."

She remained standing midway down the side of the table.  The old 
gentleman whom nobody knew had placed himself on her right, while 
she kept Steiner on her left hand.  Some guests were already sitting 
down when the sound of oaths came from the little drawing room.  It 
was Bordenave.  The company had forgotten him, and he was having all 
the trouble in the world to raise himself out of his two armchairs, 
for he was howling amain and calling for that cat of a Simonne, who 
had slipped off with the rest.  The women ran in to him, full of 
pity for his woes, and Bordenave appeared, supported, nay, almost 
carried, by Caroline, Clarisse, Tatan Nene and Maria Blond.  And 
there was much to-do over his installation at the table.

"In the middle, facing Nana!" was the cry.  "Bordenave in the 
middle!  He'll be our president!"

Thereupon the ladies seated him in the middle.  But he needed a 
second chair for his leg, and two girls lifted it up and stretched 
it carefully out.  It wouldn't matter; he would eat sideways.

"God blast it all!" he grumbled.  "We're squashed all the same!  Ah, 
my kittens, Papa recommends himself to your tender care!"

He had Rose Mignon on his right and Lucy Stewart on his left hand, 
and they promised to take good care of him.  Everybody was now 
getting settled.  Count de Vandeuvres placed himself between Lucy 
and Clarisse; Fauchery between Rose Mignon and Caroline Hequet.  On 
the other side of the table Hector de la Faloise had rushed to get 
next Gaga, and that despite the calls of Clarisse opposite, while 
Mignon, who never deserted Steiner, was only separated from him by 
Blanche and had Tatan Nene on his left.  Then came Labordette and, 
finally, at the two ends of the table were irregular crowding groups 
of young men and of women, such as Simonne, Lea de Horn and Maria 
Blond.  It was in this region that Daguenet and Georges forgathered 
more warmly than ever while smilingly gazing at Nana.

Nevertheless, two people remained standing, and there was much 
joking about it.  The men offered seats on their knees.  Clarisse, 
who could not move her elbows, told Vandeuvres that she counted on 
him to feed her.  And then that Bordenave did just take up space 
with his chairs!  There was a final effort, and at last everybody 
was seated, but, as Mignon loudly remarked, they were confoundedly 
like herrings in a barrel.

"Thick asparagus soup a la comtesse, clear soup a la Deslignac," 
murmured the waiters, carrying about platefuls in rear of the 
guests.

Bordenave was loudly recommending the thick soup when a shout arose, 
followed by protests and indignant exclamations.  The door had just 
opened, and three late arrivals, a woman and two men, had just come 
in.  Oh dear, no!  There was no space for them!  Nana, however, 
without leaving her chair, began screwing up her eyes in the effort 
to find out whether she knew them.  The woman was Louise Violaine, 
but she had never seen the men before.

"This gentleman, my dear," said Vandeuvres, "is a friend of mine, a 
naval officer, Monsieur de Foucarmont by name.  I invited him."

Foucarmont bowed and seemed very much at ease, for he added:

"And I took leave to bring one of my friends with me."

"Oh, it's quite right, quite right!" said Nana.  "Sit down, pray.  
Let's see, you--Clarisse--push up a little.  You're a good deal 
spread out down there.  That's it--where there's a will--"

They crowded more tightly than ever, and Foucarmont and Louise were 
given a little stretch of table, but the friend had to sit at some 
distance from his plate and ate his supper through dint of making a 
long arm between his neighbors' shoulders.  The waiters took away 
the soup plates and circulated rissoles of young rabbit with 
truffles and "niokys" and powdered cheese.  Bordenave agitated the 
whole table with the announcement that at one moment he had had the 
idea of bringing with him Prulliere, Fontan and old Bosc.  At this 
Nana looked sedate and remarked dryly that she would have given them 
a pretty reception.  Had she wanted colleagues, she would certainly 
have undertaken to ask them herself.  No, no, she wouldn't have 
third-rate play actors.  Old Bosc was always drunk; Prulliere was 
fond of spitting too much, and as to Fontan, he made himself 
unbearable in society with his loud voice and his stupid doings.  
Then, you know, third-rate play actors were always out of place when 
they found themselves in the society of gentlemen such as those 
around her.

"Yes, yes, it's true," Mignon declared.

All round the table the gentlemen in question looked unimpeachable 
in the extreme, what with their evening dress and their pale 
features, the natural distinction of which was still further refined 
by fatigue.  The old gentleman was as deliberate in his movements 
and wore as subtle a smile as though he were presiding over a 
diplomatic congress, and Vandeuvres, with his exquisite politeness 
toward the ladies next to him, seemed to be at one of the Countess 
Muffat's receptions.  That very morning Nana had been remarking to 
her aunt that in the matter of men one could not have done better--
they were all either wellborn or wealthy, in fact, quite the thing.  
And as to the ladies, they were behaving admirably.  Some of them, 
such as Blanche, Lea and Louise, had come in low dresses, but Gaga's 
only was perhaps a little too low, the more so because at her age 
she would have done well not to show her neck at all.  Now that the 
company were finally settled the laughter and the light jests began 
to fail.  Georges was under the impression that he had assisted at 
merrier dinner parties among the good folks of Orleans.  There was 
scarcely any conversation.  The men, not being mutually acquainted, 
stared at one another, while the women sat quite quiet, and it was 
this which especially surprised Georges.  He thought them all smugs--
he had been under the impression that everybody would begin kissing 
at once.

The third course, consisting of a Rhine carp a la Chambord and a 
saddle of venison a l'anglaise, was being served when Blanche 
remarked aloud:

"Lucy, my dear, I met your Ollivier on Sunday.  How he's grown!"

"Dear me, yes!  He's eighteen," replied Lucy.  "It doesn't make me 
feel any younger.  He went back to his school yesterday."

Her son Ollivier, whom she was wont to speak of with pride, was a 
pupil at the Ecole de Marine.  Then ensued a conversation about the 
young people, during which all the ladies waxed very tender.  Nana 
described her own great happiness.  Her baby, the little Louis, she 
said, was now at the house of her aunt, who brought him round to her 
every morning at eleven o'clock, when she would take him into her 
bed, where he played with her griffon dog Lulu.  It was enough to 
make one die of laughing to see them both burying themselves under 
the clothes at the bottom of the bed.  The company had no idea how 
cunning Louiset had already become.

"Oh, yesterday I did just pass a day!" said Rose Mignon in her turn.  
"Just imagine, I went to fetch Charles and Henry at their boarding 
school, and I had positively to take them to the theater at night.  
They jumped; they clapped their little hands: 'We shall see Mamma 
act!  We shall see Mamma act!'  Oh, it was a to-do!"

Mignon smiled complaisantly, his eyes moist with paternal 
tenderness.

"And at the play itself," he continued, "they were so funny!  They 
behaved as seriously as grown men, devoured Rose with their eyes and 
asked me why Mamma had her legs bare like that."

The whole table began laughing, and Mignon looked radiant, for his 
pride as a father was flattered.  He adored his children and had but 
one object in life, which was to increase their fortunes by 
administering the money gained by Rose at the theater and elsewhere 
with the businesslike severity of a faithful steward.  When as first 
fiddle in the music hall where she used to sing he had married her, 
they had been passionately fond of one another.  Now they were good 
friends.  There was an understanding between them: she labored hard 
to the full extent of her talent and of her beauty; he had given up 
his violin in order the better to watch over her successes as an 
actress and as a woman.  One could not have found a more homely and 
united household anywhere!

"What age is your eldest?" asked Vandeuvres.

"Henry's nine," replied Mignon, "but such a big chap for his years!"

Then he chaffed Steiner, who was not fond of children, and with 
quiet audacity informed him that were he a father, he would make a 
less stupid hash of his fortune.  While talking he watched the 
banker over Blanche's shoulders to see if it was coming off with 
Nana.  But for some minutes Rose and Fauchery, who were talking very 
near him, had been getting on his nerves.  Was Rose going to waste 
time over such a folly as that?  In that sort of case, by Jove, he 
blocked the way.  And diamond on finger and with his fine hands in 
great evidence, he finished discussing a fillet of venison.

Elsewhere the conversation about children continued.  La Faloise, 
rendered very restless by the immediate proximity of Gaga, asked 
news of her daughter, whom he had had the pleasure of noticing in 
her company at the Varietes.  Lili was quite well, but she was still 
such a tomboy!  He was astonished to learn that Lili was entering on 
her nineteenth year.  Gaga became even more imposing in his eyes, 
and when he endeavored to find out why she had not brought Lili with 
her:

"Oh no, no, never!" she said stiffly.  "Not three months ago she 
positively insisted on leaving her boarding school.  I was thinking 
of marrying her off at once, but she loves me so that I had to take 
her home--oh, so much against my will!"

Her blue eyelids with their blackened lashes blinked and wavered 
while she spoke of the business of settling her young lady.  If at 
her time of life she hadn't laid by a sou but was still always 
working to minister to men's pleasures, especially those very young 
men, whose grandmother she might well be, it was truly because she 
considered a good match of far greater importance than mere savings.  
And with that she leaned over La Faloise, who reddened under the 
huge, naked, plastered shoulder with which she well-nigh crushed 

Back to Full Books