[Several] Works by Emile Zola

which Labordette had put his name to would not be met.

"Dear me, the countess is down yonder," said Georges, letting his 
gaze wander over the stands.

"Where, where?" cried Nana.  "What eyes that baby's got!  Hold my 
sunshade, Philippe."

But with a quick forward dart Georges had outstripped his brother.  
It enchanted him to be holding the blue silk sunshade with its 
silver fringe.  Nana was scanning the scene through a huge pair of 
field glasses.

"Ah yes!  I see her," she said at length.  "In the right-hand stand, 
near a pillar, eh?  She's in mauve, and her daughter in white by her 
side.  Dear me, there's Daguenet going to bow to them."

Thereupon Philippe talked of Daguenet's approaching marriage with 
that lath of an Estelle.  It was a settled matter--the banns were 
being published.  At first the countess had opposed it, but the 
count, they said, had insisted.  Nana smiled.

"I know, I know," she murmured.  "So much the better for Paul.  He's 
a nice boy--he deserves it"

And leaning toward Louiset:

"You're enjoying yourself, eh?  What a grave face!"

The child never smiled.  With a very old expression he was gazing at 
all those crowds, as though the sight of them filled him with 
melancholy reflections.  Bijou, chased from the skirts of the young 
woman who was moving about a great deal, had come to nestle, 
shivering, against the little fellow.

Meanwhile the field was filling up.  Carriages, a compact, 
interminable file of them, were continually arriving through the 
Porte de la Cascade.  There were big omnibuses such as the Pauline, 
which had started from the Boulevard des Italiens, freighted with 
its fifty passengers, and was now going to draw up to the right of 
the stands.  Then there were dogcarts, victorias, landaus, all 
superbly well turned out, mingled with lamentable cabs which jolted 
along behind sorry old hacks, and four-in-hands, sending along their 
four horses, and mail coaches, where the masters sat on the seats 
above and left the servants to take care of the hampers of champagne 
inside, and "spiders," the immense wheels of which were a flash of 
glittering steel, and light tandems, which looked as delicately 
formed as the works of a clock and slipped along amid a peal of 
little bells.  Every few seconds an equestrian rode by, and a swarm 
of people on foot rushed in a scared way among the carriages.  On 
the green the far-off rolling sound which issued from the avenues in 
the Bois died out suddenly in dull rustlings, and now nothing was 
audible save the hubbub of the ever-increasing crowds and cries and 
calls and the crackings of whips in the open.  When the sun, amid 
bursts of wind, reappeared at the edge of a cloud, a long ray of 
golden light ran across the field, lit up the harness and the 
varnished coach panels and touched the ladies' dresses with fire, 
while amid the dusty radiance the coachmen, high up on their boxes, 
flamed beside their great whips.

Labordette was getting out of an open carriage where Gaga, Clarisse 
and Blanche de Sivry had kept a place for him.  As he was hurrying 
to cross the course and enter the weighing enclosure Nana got 
Georges to call him.  Then when he came up:

"What's the betting on me?" she asked laughingly.

She referred to the filly Nana, the Nana who had let herself be 
shamefully beaten in the race for the Prix de Diane and had not even 
been placed in April and May last when she ran for the Prix des Cars 
and the Grande Poule des Produits, both of which had been gained by 
Lusignan, the other horse in the Vandeuvres stable.  Lusignan had 
all at once become prime favorite, and since yesterday he had been 
currently taken at two to one.

"Always fifty to one against," replied Labordette.

"The deuce!  I'm not worth much," rejoined Nana, amused by the jest.  
"I don't back myself then; no, by jingo!  I don't put a single louis 
on myself."

Labordette went off again in a great hurry, but she recalled him.  
She wanted some advice.  Since he kept in touch with the world of 
trainers and jockeys he had special information about various 
stables.  His prognostications had come true a score of times 
already, and people called him the "King of Tipsters."

"Let's see, what horses ought I to choose?" said the young woman.  
"What's the betting on the Englishman?"

"Spirit?  Three to one against.  Valerio II, the same.  As to the 
others, they're laying twenty-five to one against Cosinus, forty to 
one against Hazard, thirty to one against Bourn, thirty-five to one 
against Pichenette, ten to one against Frangipane."

"No, I don't bet on the Englishman, I don't.  I'm a patriot.  
Perhaps Valerio II would do, eh?  The Duc de Corbreuse was beaming a 
little while ago.  Well, no, after all!  Fifty louis on Lusignan; 
what do you say to that?"

Labordette looked at her with a singular expression.  She leaned 
forward and asked him questions in a low voice, for she was aware 
that Vandeuvres commissioned him to arrange matters with the 
bookmakers so as to be able to bet the more easily.  Supposing him 
to have got to know something, he might quite well tell it her.  But 
without entering into explanations Labordette persuaded her to trust 
to his sagacity.  He would put on her fifty louis for her as he 
might think best, and she would not repent of his arrangement.

"All the horses you like!" she cried gaily, letting him take his 
departure, "but no Nana; she's a jade!"

There was a burst of uproarious laughter in the carriage.  The young 
men thought her sally very amusing, while Louiset in his ignorance 
lifted his pale eyes to his mother's face, for her loud exclamations 
surprised him.  However, there was no escape for Labordette as yet.  
Rose Mignon had made a sign to him and was now giving him her 
commands while he wrote figures in a notebook.  Then Clarisse and 
Gaga called him back in order to change their bets, for they had 
heard things said in the crowd, and now they didn't want to have 
anything more to do with Valerio II and were choosing Lusignan.  He 
wrote down their wishes with an impassible expression and at length 
managed to escape.  He could be seen disappearing between two of the 
stands on the other side of the course.

Carriages were still arriving.  They were by this time drawn up five 
rows deep, and a dense mass of them spread along the barriers, 
checkered by the light coats of white horses.  Beyond them other 
carriages stood about in comparative isolation, looking as though 
they had stuck fast in the grass.  Wheels and harness were here, 
there and everywhere, according as the conveyances to which they 
belonged were side by side, at an angle, across and across or head 
to head.  Over such spaces of turf as still remained unoccupied 
cavaliers kept trotting, and black groups of pedestrians moved 
continually.  The scene resembled the field where a fair is being 
held, and above it all, amid the confused motley of the crowd, the 
drinking booths raised their gray canvas roofs which gleamed white 
in the sunshine.  But a veritable tumult, a mob, an eddy of hats, 
surged round the several bookmakers, who stood in open carriages 
gesticulating like itinerant dentists while their odds were pasted 
up on tall boards beside them.

"All the same, it's stupid not to know on what horse one's betting," 
Nana was remarking.  "I really must risk some louis in person."

She had stood up to select a bookmaker with a decent expression of 
face but forgot what she wanted on perceiving a perfect crowd of her 
acquaintance.  Besides the Mignons, besides Gaga, Clarisse and 
Blanche, there were present, to the right and left, behind and in 
the middle of the mass of carriages now hemming in her landau, the 
following ladies: Tatan Nene and Maria Blond in a victoria, Caroline 
Hequet with her mother and two gentlemen in an open carriage, Louise 
Violaine quite alone, driving a little basket chaise decked with 
orange and green ribbons, the colors of the Mechain stables, and 
finally, Lea de Horn on the lofty seat of a mail coach, where a band 
of young men were making a great din.  Farther off, in a HUIT 
RESSORTS of aristocratic appearance, Lucy Stewart, in a very simple 
black silk dress, sat, looking distinguished beside a tall young man 
in the uniform of a naval cadet.  But what most astounded Nana was 
the arrival of Simonne in a tandem which Steiner was driving, while 
a footman sat motionless, with folded arms, behind them.  She looked 
dazzling in white satin striped with yellow and was covered with 
diamonds from waist to hat.  The banker, on his part, was handling a 
tremendous whip and sending along his two horses, which were 
harnessed tandemwise, the leader being a little warm-colored 
chestnut with a mouselike trot, the shaft horse a big brown bay, a 
stepper, with a fine action.

"Deuce take it!" said Nana.  "So that thief Steiner has cleared the 
Bourse again, has he?  I say, isn't Simonne a swell!  It's too much 
of a good thing; he'll get into the clutches of the law!"

Nevertheless, she exchanged greetings at a distance.  Indeed, she 
kept waving her hand and smiling, turning round and forgetting no 
one in her desire to be seen by everybody.  At the same time she 
continued chatting.

"It's her son Lucy's got in tow!  He's charming in his uniform.  
That's why she's looking so grand, of course!  You know she's afraid 
of him and that she passes herself off as an actress.  Poor young 
man, I pity him all the same!  He seems quite unsuspicious."

"Bah," muttered Philippe, laughing, "she'll be able to find him an 
heiress in the country when she likes."

Nana was silent, for she had just noticed the Tricon amid the thick 
of the carriages.  Having arrived in a cab, whence she could not see 
anything, the Tricon had quietly mounted the coach box.  And there, 
straightening up her tall figure, with her noble face enshrined in 
its long curls, she dominated the crowd as though enthroned amid her 
feminine subjects.  All the latter smiled discreetly at her while 
she, in her superiority, pretended not to know them.  She wasn't 
there for business purposes: she was watching the races for the love 
of the thing, as became a frantic gambler with a passion for 
horseflesh.

"Dear me, there's that idiot La Faloise!" said Georges suddenly.

It was a surprise to them all.  Nana did not recognize her La 
Faloise, for since he had come into his inheritance he had grown 
extraordinarily up to date.  He wore a low collar and was clad in a 
cloth of delicate hue which fitted close to his meager shoulders.  
His hair was in little bandeaux, and he affected a weary kind of 
swagger, a soft tone of voice and slang words and phrases which he 
did not take the trouble to finish.

"But he's quite the thing!" declared Nana in perfect enchantment.

Gaga and Clarisse had called La Faloise and were throwing themselves 
at him in their efforts to regain his allegiance, but he left them 
immediately, rolling off in a chaffing, disdainful manner.  Nana 
dazzled him.  He rushed up to her and stood on the carriage step, 
and when she twitted him about Gaga he murmured:

"Oh dear, no!  We've seen the last of the old lot!  Mustn't play her 
off on me any more.  And then, you know, it's you now, Juliet mine!"

He had put his hand to his heart.  Nana laughed a good deal at this 
exceedingly sudden out-of-door declaration.  She continued:

"I say, that's not what I'm after.  You're making me forget that I 
want to lay wagers.  Georges, you see that bookmaker down there, a 
great red-faced man with curly hair?  He's got a dirty blackguard 
expression which I like.  You're to go and choose--Oh, I say, what 
can one choose?"

"I'm not a patriotic soul--oh dear, no!" La Faloise blurted out.  
"I'm all for the Englishman.  It will be ripping if the Englishman 
gains!  The French may go to Jericho!"

Nana was scandalized.  Presently the merits of the several horses 
began to be discussed, and La Faloise, wishing to be thought very 
much in the swim, spoke of them all as sorry jades.  Frangipane, 
Baron Verdier's horse, was by The Truth out of Lenore.  A big bay 
horse he was, who would certainly have stood a chance if they hadn't 
let him get foundered during training.  As to Valerio II from the 
Corbreuse stable, he wasn't ready yet; he'd had the colic in April.  
Oh yes, they were keeping that dark, but he was sure of it, on his 
honor!  In the end he advised Nana to choose Hazard, the most 
defective of the lot, a horse nobody would have anything to do with.  
Hazard, by jingo--such superb lines and such an action!  That horse 
was going to astonish the people.

"No," said Nana, "I'm going to put ten louis on Lusignan and five on 
Boum."

La Faloise burst forth at once:

"But, my dear girl, Boum's all rot!  Don't choose him!  Gasc himself 
is chucking up backing his own horse.  And your Lusignan--never!  
Why, it's all humbug!  By Lamb and Princess--just think!  By Lamb 
and Princess--no, by Jove!  All too short in the legs!"

He was choking.  Philippe pointed out that, notwithstanding this, 
Lusignan had won the Prix des Cars and the Grande Poule des 
Produits.  But the other ran on again.  What did that prove?  
Nothing at all.  On the contrary, one ought to distrust him.  And 
besides, Gresham rode Lusignan; well then, let them jolly well dry 
up!  Gresham had bad luck; he would never get to the post.

And from one end of the field to the other the discussion raging in 
Nana's landau seemed to spread and increase.  Voices were raised in 
a scream; the passion for gambling filled the air, set faces glowing 
and arms waving excitedly, while the bookmakers, perched on their 
conveyances, shouted odds and jotted down amounts right furiously.  
Yet these were only the small fry of the betting world; the big bets 
were made in the weighing enclosure.  Here, then, raged the keen 
contest of people with light purses who risked their five-franc 
pieces and displayed infinite covetousness for the sake of a 
possible gain of a few louis.  In a word, the battle would be 
between Spirit and Lusignan.  Englishmen, plainly recognizable as 
such, were strolling about among the various groups.  They were 
quite at home; their faces were fiery with excitement; they were 
afready triumphant.  Bramah, a horse belonging to Lord Reading, had 
gained the Grand Prix the previous year, and this had been a defeat 
over which hearts were still bleeding.  This year it would be 
terrible if France were beaten anew.  Accordingly all the ladies 
were wild with national pride.  The Vandeuvres stable became the 
rampart of their honor, and Lusignan was pushed and defended and 
applauded exceedingly.  Gaga, Blanche, Caroline and the rest betted 
on Lusignan.  Lucy Stewart abstained from this on account of her 
son, but it was bruited abroad that Rose Mignon had commissioned 
Labordette to risk two hundred louis for her.  The Tricon, as she 
sat alone next her driver, waited till the last moment.  Very cool, 
indeed, amid all these disputes, very far above the ever-increasing 
uproar in which horses' names kept recurring and lively Parisian 
phrases mingled with guttural English exclamations, she sat 
listening and taking notes majestically.

"And Nana?" said Georges.  "Does no one want her?"

Indeed, nobody was asking for the filly; she was not even being 
mentioned.  The outsider of the Vandeuvres's stud was swamped by 
Lusignan's popularity.  But La Faloise flung his arms up, crying:

"I've an inspiration.  I'll bet a louis on Nana."

"Bravo!  I bet a couple," said Georges.

"And I three," added Philippe.

And they mounted up and up, bidding against one another good-
humoredly and naming prices as though they had been haggling over 
Nana at an auction.  La Faloise said he would cover her with gold.  
Besides, everybody was to be made to back her; they would go and 
pick up backers.  But as the three young men were darting off to 
propagandize, Nana shouted after them:

"You know I don't want to have anything to do with her; I don't for 
the world!  Georges, ten louis on Lusignan and five on Valerio II."

Meanwhile they had started fairly off, and she watched them gaily as 
they slipped between wheels, ducked under horses' heads and scoured 
the whole field.  The moment they recognized anyone in a carriage 
they rushed up and urged Nana's claims.  And there were great bursts 
of laughter among the crowd when sometimes they turned back, 
triumphantly signaling amounts with their fingers, while the young 
woman stood and waved her sunshade.  Nevertheless, they made poor 
enough work of it.  Some men let themselves be persuaded; Steiner, 
for instance, ventured three louis, for the sight of Nana stirred 
him.  But the women refused point-blank.  "Thanks," they said; "to 
lose for a certainty!"  Besides, they were in no hurry to work for 
the benefit of a dirty wench who was overwhelming them all with her 
four white horses, her postilions and her outrageous assumption of 
side.  Gaga and Clarisse looked exceedingly prim and asked La 
Faloise whether he was jolly well making fun of them.  When Georges 
boldly presented himself before the Mignons' carriage Rose turned 
her head away in the most marked manner and did not answer him.  One 
must be a pretty foul sort to let one's name be given to a horse!  
Mignon, on the contrary, followed the young man's movements with a 
look of amusement and declared that the women always brought luck.

"Well?" queried Nana when the young men returned after a prolonged 
visit to the bookmakers.

"The odds are forty to one against you," said La Faloise.

"What's that?  Forty to one!" she cried, astounded.  "They were 
fifty to one against me.  What's happened?"

Labordette had just then reappeared.  The course was being cleared, 
and the pealing of a bell announced the first race.  Amid the 
expectant murmur of the bystanders she questioned him about this 
sudden rise in her value.  But he replied evasively; doubtless a 
demand for her had arisen.  She had to content herself with this 
explanation.  Moreover, Labordette announced with a preoccupied 
expression that Vandeuvres was coming if he could get away.

The race was ending unnoticed; people were all waiting for the Grand 
Prix to be run--when a storm burst over the Hippodrome.  For some 
minutes past the sun had disappeared, and a wan twilight had 
darkened over the multitude.  Then the wind rose, and there ensued a 
sudden deluge.  Huge drops, perfect sheets of water, fell.  There 
was a momentary confusion, and people shouted and joked and swore, 
while those on foot scampered madly off to find refuge under the 
canvas of the drinking booths.  In the carriages the women did their 
best to shelter themselves, grasping their sunshades with both 
hands, while the bewildered footmen ran to the hoods.  But the 
shower was already nearly over, and the sun began shining 
brilliantly through escaping clouds of fine rain.  A blue cleft 
opened in the stormy mass, which was blown off over the Bois, and 
the skies seemed to smile again and to set the women laughing in a 
reassured manner, while amid the snorting of horses and the disarray 
and agitation of the drenched multitude that was shaking itself dry 
a broad flush of golden light lit up the field, still dripping and 
glittering with crystal drops.

"Oh, that poor, dear Louiset!" said Nana.  "Are you very drenched, 
my darling?"

The little thing silently allowed his hands to be wiped.  The young 
woman had taken out her handkerchief.  Then she dabbed it over 
Bijou, who was trembling more violently than ever.  It would not 
matter in the least; there were a few drops on the white satin of 
her dress, but she didn't care a pin for them.  The bouquets, 
refreshed by the rain, glowed like snow, and she smelled one 
ecstatically, drenching her lips in it as though it were wet with 
dew.

Meanwhile the burst of rain had suddenly filled the stands.  Nana 
looked at them through her field glasses.  At that distance you 
could only distinguish a compact, confused mass of people, heaped 
up, as it were, on the ascending ranges of steps, a dark background 
relieved by light dots which were human faces.  The sunlight 
filtered in through openings near the roof at each end of the stand 
and detached and illumined portions of the seated multitude, where 
the ladies' dresses seemed to lose their distinguishing colors.  But 
Nana was especially amused by the ladies whom the shower had driven 
from the rows of chairs ranged on the sand at the base of the 
stands.  As courtesans were absolutely forbidden to enter the 
enclosure, she began making exceedingly bitter remarks about all the 
fashionable women therein assembled.  She thought them fearfully 
dressed up, and such guys!

There was a rumor that the empress was entering the little central 
stand, a pavilion built like a chalet, with a wide balcony furnished 
with red armchairs.

"Why, there he is!" said Georges.  "I didn't think he was on duty 
this week."

The stiff and solemn form of the Count Muffat had appeared behind 
the empress.  Thereupon the young men jested and were sorry that 
Satin wasn't there to go and dig him in the ribs.  But Nana's field 
glass focused the head of the Prince of Scots in the imperial stand.

"Gracious, it's Charles!" she cried.

She thought him stouter than formerly.  In eighteen months he had 
broadened, and with that she entered into particulars.  Oh yes, he 
was a big, solidly built fellow!

All round her in the ladies' carriages they were whispering that the 
count had given her up.  It was quite a long story.  Since he had 
been making himself noticeable, the Tuileries had grown scandalized 
at the chamberlain's conduct.  Whereupon, in order ro retain his 
position, he had recently broken it off with Nana.  La Faloise 
bluntly reported this account of matters to the young woman and, 
addressing her as his Juliet, again offered himself.  But she 
laughed merrily and remarked:

"It's idiotic!  You won't know him; I've only to say, 'Come here,' 
for him to chuck up everything."

For some seconds past she had been examining the Countess Sabine and 
Estelle.  Daguenet was still at their side.  Fauchery had just 
arrived and was disturbing the people round him in his desire to 
make his bow to them.  He, too, stayed smilingly beside them.  After 
that Nana pointed with disdainful action at the stands and 
continued:

"Then, you know, those people don't fetch me any longer now!  I know 
'em too well.  You should see 'em behind scenes.  No more honor!  
It's all up with honor!  Filth belowstairs, filth abovestairs, filth 
everywhere.  That's why I won't be bothered about 'em!"

And with a comprehensive gesture she took in everybody, from the 
grooms leading the horses on to the course to the sovereign lady 
busy chatting with with Charles, a prince and a dirty fellow to 
boot.

"Bravo, Nana!  Awfully smart, Nana!" cried La Faloise 
enthusiastically.

The tolling of a bell was lost in the wind; the races continued.  
The Prix d'Ispahan had just been run for and Berlingot, a horse 
belonging to the Mechain stable, had won.  Nana recalled Labordette 
in order to obtain news of the hundred louis, but he burst out 
laughing and refused to let her know the horses he had chosen for 
her, so as not to disturb the luck, as he phrased it.  Her money was 
well placed; she would see that all in good time.  And when she 
confessed her bets to him and told him how she had put ten louis on 
Lusignan and five on Valerio II, he shrugged his shoulders, as who 
should say that women did stupid things whatever happened.  His 
action surprised her; she was quite at sea.

Just then the field grew more animated than before.  Open-air 
lunches were arranged in the interval before the Grand Prix.  There 
was much eating and more drinking in all directions, on the grass, 
on the high seats of the four-in-hands and mail coaches, in the 
victorias, the broughams, the landaus.  There was a universal spread 
of cold viands and a fine disorderly display of champagne baskets 
which footmen kept handing down out of the coach boots.  Corks came 
out with feeble pops, which the wind drowned.  There was an 
interchange of jests, and the sound of breaking glasses imparted a 
note of discord to the high-strung gaiety of the scene.  Gaga and 
Clarisse, together with Blanche, were making a serious repast, for 
they were eating sandwiches on the carriage rug with which they had 
been covering their knees.  Louise Violaine had got down from her 
basket carriage and had joined Caroline Hequet.  On the turf at 
their feet some gentlemen had instituted a drinking bar, whither 
Tatan, Maria, Simonne and the rest came to refresh themselves, while 
high in air and close at hand bottles were being emptied on Lea de 
Horn's mail coach, and, with infinite bravado and gesticulation, a 
whole band were making themselves tipsy in the sunshine, above the 
heads of the crowd.  Soon, however, there was an especially large 
crowd by Nana's landau.  She had risen to her feet and had set 
herself to pour out glasses of champagne for the men who came to pay 
her their respects.  Francois, one of the footmen, was passing up 
the bottles while La Faloise, trying hard to imitate a coster's 
accents, kept pattering away:

"'Ere y're, given away, given away!  There's some for everybody!"

"Do be still, dear boy," Nana ended by saying.  "We look like a set 
of tumblers."

She thought him very droll and was greatly entertained.  At one 
moment she conceived the idea of sending Georges with a glass of 
champagne to Rose Mignon, who was affecting temperance.  Henri and 
Charles were bored to distraction; they would have been glad of some 
champagne, the poor little fellows.  But Georges drank the glassful, 
for he feared an argument.  Then Nana remembered Louiset, who was 
sitting forgotten behind her.  Maybe he was thirsty, and she forced 
him to take a drop or two of wine, which made him cough dreadfully.

"'Ere y'are, 'ere y'are, gemmen!" La Faloise reiterated.  "It don't 
cost two sous; it don't cost one.  We give it away."

But Nana broke in with an exclamation:

"Gracious, there's Bordenave down there!  Call him.  Oh, run, 
please, please do!"

It was indeed Bordenave.  He was strolling about with his hands 
behind his back, wearing a hat that looked rusty in the sunlight and 
a greasy frock coat that was glossy at the seams.  It was Bordenave 
shattered by bankruptcy, yet furious despite all reverses, a 
Bordenave who flaunted his misery among all the fine folks with the 
hardihood becoming a man ever ready to take Dame Fortune by storm.

"The deuce, how smart we are!" he said when Nana extended her hand 
to him like the good-natured wench she was.

Presently, after emptying a glass of champagne, he gave vent to the 
followmg profoundly regretful phrase:

"Ah, if only I were a woman!  But, by God, that's nothing!  Would 
you like to go on the stage again?  I've a notion: I'll hire the 
Gaite, and we'll gobble up Paris between us.  You certainly owe it 
me, eh?"

And he lingered, grumbling, beside her, though glad to see her 
again; for, he said, that confounded Nana was balm to his feelings.  
Yes, it was balm to them merely to exist in her presence!  She was 
his daughter; she was blood of his blood!

The circle increased, for now La Faloise was filling glasses, and 
Georges and Philippe were picking up friends.  A stealthy impulse 
was gradually bringing in the whole field.  Nana would fling 
everyone a laughing smile or an amusing phrase.  The groups of 
tipplers were drawing near, and all the champagne scattered over the 
place was moving in her direction.  Soon there was only one noisy 
crowd, and that was round her landau, where she queened it among 
outstretched glasses, her yellow hair floating on the breeze and her 
snowy face bathed in the sunshine.  Then by way of a finishing touch 
and to make the other women, who were mad at her triumph, simply 
perish of envy, she lifted a brimming glass on high and assumed her 
old pose as Venus Victrix.

But somebody touched her shoulder, and she was surprised, on turning 
round, to see Mignon on the seat.  She vanished from view an instant 
and sat herself down beside him, for he had come to communicate a 
matter of importance.  Mignon had everywhere declared that it was 
ridiculous of his wife to bear Nana a grudge; he thought her 
attitude stupid and useless.

"Look here, my dear," he whispered.  "Be careful: don't madden Rose 
too much.  You understand, I think it best to warn you.  Yes, she's 
got a weapon in store, and as she's never forgiven you the Petite 
Duchesse business--"

"A weapon," said Nana; "what's that blooming well got to do with 
me?"

"Just listen: it's a letter she must have found in Fauchery's 
pocket, a letter written to that screw Fauchery by the Countess 
Muffat.  And, by Jove, it's clear the whole story's in it.  Well 
then, Rose wants to send the letter to the count so as to be 
revenged on him and on you."

"What the deuce has that got to do with me?" Nana repeated.  "It's a 
funny business.  So the whole story about Fauchery's in it!  Very 
well, so much the better; the woman has been exasperating me!  We 
shall have a good laugh!"

"No, I don't wish it," Mignon briskly rejoined.  "There'll be a 
pretty scandal!  Besides, we've got nothing to gain."

He paused, fearing lest he should say too much, while she loudly 
averred that she was most certainly not going to get a chaste woman 
into trouble.

But when he still insisted on his refusal she looked steadily at 
him.  Doubtless he was afraid of seeing Fauchery again introduced 
into his family in case he broke with the countess.  While avenging 
her own wrongs, Rose was anxious for that to happen, since she still 
felt a kindness toward the journalist.  And Nana waxed meditative 
and thought of M. Venot's call, and a plan began to take shape in 
her brain, while Mignon was doing his best to talk her over.

"Let's suppose that Rose sends the letter, eh?  There's food for 
scandal: you're mixed up in the business, and people say you're the 
cause of it all.  Then to begin with, the count separates from his 
wife."

"Why should he?" she said.  "On the contrary--"

She broke off, in her turn.  There was no need for her to think 
aloud.  So in order to be rid of Mignon she looked as though she 
entered into his view of the case, and when he advised her to give 
Rose some proof of her submission--to pay her a short visit on the 
racecourse, for instance, where everybody would see her--she replied 
that she would see about it, that she would think the matter over.

A commotion caused her to stand up again.  On the course the horses 
were coming in amid a sudden blast of wind.  The prize given by the 
city of Paris had just been run for, and Cornemuse had gained it.  
Now the Grand Prix was about to be run, and the fever of the crowd 
increased, and they were tortured by anxiety and stamped and swayed 
as though they wanted to make the minutes fly faster.  At this 
ultimate moment the betting world was surprised and startled by the 
continued shortening of the odds against Nana, the outsider of the 
Vandeuvres stables.  Gentlemen kept returning every few moments with 
a new quotation: the betting was thirty to one against Nana; it was 
twenty-five to one against Nana, then twenty to one, then fifteen to 
one.  No one could understand it.  A filly beaten on all the 
racecourses!  A filly which that same morning no single sportsman 
would take at fifty to one against!  What did this sudden madness 
betoken?  Some laughed at it and spoke of the pretty doing awaiting 
the duffers who were being taken in by the joke.  Others looked 
serious and uneasy and sniffed out something ugly under it all.  
Perhaps there was a "deal" in the offing.  Allusion was made to 
well-known stories about the robberies which are winked at on 
racecourses, but on this occasion the great name of Vandeuvres put a 
stop to all such accusations, and the skeptics in the end prevailed 
when they prophesied that Nana would come in last of all.

"Who's riding Nana?" queried La Faloise.

Just then the real Nana reappeared, whereat the gentlemen lent his 
question an indecent meaning and burst into an uproarious fit of 
laughter.  Nana bowed.

"Price is up," she replied.

And with that the discussion began again.  Price was an English 
celebrity.  Why had Vandeuvres got this jockey to come over, seeing 
that Gresham ordinarily rode Nana?  Besides, they were astonished to 
see him confiding Lusignan to this man Gresham, who, according to La 
Faloise, never got a place.  But all these remarks were swallowed up 
in jokes, contradictions and an extraordinarily noisy confusion of 
opinions.  In order to kill time the company once more set 
themselves to drain bottles of champagne.  Presently a whisper ran 
round, and the different groups opened outward.  It was Vandeuvres.  
Nana affected vexation.

"Dear me, you're a nice fellow to come at this time of day!  Why, 
I'm burning to see the enclosure."

"Well, come along then," he said; "there's still time.  You'll take 
a stroll round with me.  I just happen to have a permit for a lady 
about me."

And he led her off on his arm while she enjoyed the jealous glances 
with which Lucy, Caroline and the others followed her.  The young 
Hugons and La Faloise remained in the landau behind her retreating 
figure and continued to do the honors of her champagne.  She shouted 
to them that she would return immediately.

But Vandeuvres caught sight of Labordette and called him, and there 
was an interchange of brief sentences.

"You've scraped everything up?"

"Yes."

"To what amount?"

"Fifteen hundred louis--pretty well all over the place."

As Nana was visibly listening, and that with much curiosity, they 
held their tongues.  Vandeuvres was very nervous, and he had those 
same clear eyes, shot with little flames, which so frightened her 
the night he spoke of burning himself and his horses together.  As 
they crossed over the course she spoke low and familiarly.

"I say, do explain this to me.  Why are the odds on your filly 
changing?"

He trembled, and this sentence escaped him:

"Ah, they're talking, are they?  What a set those betting men are!  
When I've got the favorite they all throw themselves upon him, and 
there's no chance for me.  After that, when an outsider's asked for, 
they give tongue and yell as though they were being skinned."

"You ought to tell me what's going to happen--I've made my bets," 
she reioined.  "Has Nana a chance?"

A sudden, unreasonable burst of anger overpowered him.

"Won't you deuced well let me be, eh?  Every horse has a chance.  
The odds are shortening because, by Jove, people have taken the 
horse.  Who, I don't know.  I should prefer leaving you if you must 
needs badger me with your idiotic questions."

Such a tone was not germane either to his temperament or his habits, 
and Nana was rather surprised than wounded.  Besides, he was ashamed 
of himself directly afterward, and when she begged him in a dry 
voice to behave politely he apologized.  For some time past he had 
suffered from such sudden changes of temper.  No one in the Paris of 
pleasure or of society was ignorant of the fact that he was playing 
his last trump card today.  If his horses did not win, if, moreover, 
they lost him the considerable sums wagered upon them, it would mean 
utter disaster and collapse for him, and the bulwark of his credit 
and the lofty appearance which, though undermined, he still kept up, 
would come ruining noisily down.  Moreover, no one was ignorant of 
the fact that Nana was the devouring siren who had finished him off, 
who had been the last to attack his crumbling fortunes and to sweep 
up what remained of them.  Stories were told of wild whims and 
fancies, of gold scattered to the four winds, of a visit to Baden-
Baden, where she had not left him enough to pay the hotel bill, of a 
handful of diamonds cast on the fire during an evening of 
drunkenness in order to see whether they would burn like coal.  
Little by little her great limbs and her coarse, plebeian way of 
laughing had gained complete mastery over this elegant, degenerate 
son of an ancient race.  At that time he was risking his all, for he 
had been so utterly overpowered by his taste for ordure and 
stupidity as to have even lost the vigor of his skepticism.  A week 
before Nana had made him promise her a chateau on the Norman coast 
between Havre and Trouville, and now he was staking the very 
foundations of his honor on the fulfillment of his word.  Only she 
was getting on his nerves, and he could have beaten her, so stupid 
did he feel her to be.

The man at the gate, not daring to stop the woman hanging on the 
count's arm, had allowed them to enter the enclosure.  Nana, greatly 
puffed up at the thought that at last she was setting foot on the 
forbidden ground, put on her best behavior and walked slowly by the 
ladies seated at the foot of the stands.  On ten rows of chairs the 
toilets were densely massed, and in the blithe open air their bright 
colors mingled harmoniously.  Chairs were scattered about, and as 
people met one another friendly circles were formed, just as though 
the company had been sitting under the trees in a public garden.  
Children had been allowed to go free and were running from group to 
group, while over head the stands rose tier above crowded tier and 
the light-colored dresses therein faded into the delicate shadows of 
the timberwork.  Nana stared at all these ladies.  She stared 
steadily and markedly at the Countess Sabine.  After which, as she 
was passing in front of the imperial stand, the sight of Muffat, 
looming in all his official stiffness by the side of the empress, 
made her very merry.

"Oh, how silly he looks!" she said at the top of her voice to 
Vandeuvres.  She was anxious to pay everything a visit.  This small 
parklike region, with its green lawns and groups of trees, rather 
charmed her than otherwise.  A vendor of ices had set up a large 
buffet near the entrance gates, and beneath a rustic thatched roof a 
dense throng of people were shouting and gesticulating.  This was 
the ring.  Close by were some empty stalls, and Nana was 
disappointed at discovering only a gendarme's horse there.  Then 
there was the paddock, a small course some hundred meters in 
circumference, where a stable help was walking about Valerio II in 
his horsecloths.  And, oh, what a lot of men on the graveled 
sidewalks, all of them with their tickets forming an orange-colored 
patch in their bottonholes!  And what a continual parade of people 
in the open galleries of the grandstands!  The scene interested her 
for a moment or two, but truly, it was not worth while getting the 
spleen because they didn't admit you inside here.

Daguenet and Fauchery passed by and bowed to her.  She made them a 
sign, and they had to come up.  Thereupon she made hay of the 
weighing-in enclosure.  But she broke off abruptly:

"Dear me, there's the Marquis de Chouard!  How old he's growing!  
That old man's killing himself!  Is he still as mad about it as 
ever?"

Thereupon Daguenet described the old man's last brilliant stroke.  
The story dated from the day before yesterday, and no one knew it as 
yet.  After dangling about for months he had bought her daughter 
Amelie from Gaga for thirty thousand francs, they said.

"Good gracious!  That's a nice business!" cried Nana in disgust. "Go 
in for the regular thing, please!  But now that I come to think of 
it, that must be Lili down there on the grass with a lady in a 
brougham.  I recognized the face.  The old boy will have brought her 
out."

Vandeuvres was not listening; he was impatient and longed to get rid 
of her.  But Fauchery having remarked at parting that if she had not 
seen the bookmakers she had seen nothing, the count was obliged to 
take her to them in spite of his obvious repugnance.  And she was 
perfectly happy at once; that truly was a curious sight, she said!

Amid lawns bordered by young horse-chestnut trees there was a round 
open enclosure, where, forming a vast circle under the shadow of the 
tender green leaves, a dense line of bookmakers was waiting for 
betting men, as though they had been hucksters at a fair.  In order 
to overtop and command the surrounding crowd they had taken up 
positions on wooden benches, and they were advertising their prices 
on the trees beside them.  They had an ever-vigilant glance, and 
they booked wagers in answer to a single sign, a mere wink, so 
rapidly that certain curious onlookers watched them openmouthed, 
without being able to understand it all.  Confusion reigned; prices 
were shouted, and any unexpected change in a quotation was received 
with something like tumult.  Occasionally scouts entered the place 
at a run and redoubled the uproar as they stopped at the entrance to 
the rotunda and, at the tops of their voices, announced departures 
and arrivals.  In this place, where the gambling fever was pulsing 
in the sunshine, such announcements were sure to raise a prolonged 
muttering sound.

"They ARE funny!" murmured Nana, greatly entertained.

"Their features look as if they had been put on the wrong way.  Just 
you see that big fellow there; I shouldn't care to meet him all 
alone in the middle of a wood."

But Vandeuvres pointed her out a bookmaker, once a shopman in a 
fancy repository, who had made three million francs in two years.  
He was slight of build, delicate and fair, and people all round him 
treated him with great respect.  They smiled when they addressed 
him, while others took up positions close by in order to catch a 
glimpse of him.

They were at length leaving the ring when Vandeuvres nodded slightly 
to another bookmaker, who thereupon ventured to call him.  It was 
one of his former coachmen, an enormous fellow with the shoulders of 
an ox and a high color.  Now that he was trying his fortunes at race 
meetings on the strength of some mysteriously obtained capital, the 
count was doing his utmost to push him, confiding to him his secret 
bets and treating him on all occasions as a servant to whom one 
shows one's true character.  Yet despite this protection, the man 
had in rapid succession lost very heavy sums, and today he, too, was 
playing his last card.  There was blood in his eyes; he looked fit 
to drop with apoplexy.

"Well, Marechal," queried the count in the lowest of voices, "to 
what amount have you laid odds?"

"To five thousand louis, Monsieur le Comte," replied the bookmaker, 
likewise lowering his voice.  "A pretty job, eh?  I'll confess to 
you that I've increased the odds; I've made it three to one."

Vandeuvres looked very much put out.

"No, no, I don't want you to do that.  Put it at two to one again 
directly.  I shan't tell you any more, Marechal."

"Oh, how can it hurt, Monsieur le Comte, at this time o' day?" 
rejoined the other with the humble smile befitting an accomplice.  
"I had to attract the people so as to lay your two thousand louis."

At this Vandeuvres silenced him.  But as he was going off Marechal 
remembered something and was sorry he had not questioned him about 
the shortening of the odds on the filly.  It would be a nice 
business for him if the filly stood a chance, seeing that he had 
just laid fifty to one about her in two hundreds.

Nana, though she did not understand a word of what the count was 
whispering, dared not, however, ask for new explanations.  He seemed 
more nervous than before and abruptly handed her over to Labordette, 
whom they came upon in front of the weighing-in room.

"You'll take her back," he said.  "I've got something on hand.  Au 
revoir!"

And he entered the room, which was narrow and low-pitched and half 
filled with a great pair of scales.  It was like a waiting room in a 
suburban station, and Nana was again hugely disillusioned, for she 
had been picturing to herself something on a very vast scale, a 
monumental machine, in fact, for weighing horses.  Dear me, they 
only weighed the jockeys!  Then it wasn't worth while making such a 
fuss with their weighing!  In the scale a jockey with an idiotic 
expression was waiting, harness on knee, till a stout man in a frock 
coat should have done verifying his weight.  At the door a stable 
help was holding a horse, Cosinus, round which a silent and deeply 
interested throng was clustering.

The course was about to be cleared.  Labordette hurried Nana but 
retraced his steps in order to show her a little man talking with 
Vandeuvres at some distance from the rest.

"Dear me, there's Price!" he said.

"Ah yes, the man who's mounting me," she murmured laughingly.

And she declared him to be exquisitely ugly.  All jockeys struck her 
as looking idiotic, doubtless, she said, because they were prevented 
from growing bigger.  This particular jockey was a man of forty, and 
with his long, thin, deeply furrowed, hard, dead countenance, he 
looked like an old shriveled-up child.  His body was knotty and so 
reduced in size that his blue jacket with its white sleeves looked 
as if it had been thrown over a lay figure.

"No," she resumed as she walked away, "he would never make me very 
happy, you know."

A mob of people were still crowding the course, the turf of which 
had been wet and trampled on till it had grown black.  In front of 
the two telegraphs, which hung very high up on their cast-iron 
pillars, the crowd were jostling together with upturned faces, 
uproariously greeting the numbers of the different horses as an 
electric wire in connection with the weighing room made them appear.  
Gentlemen were pointing at programs: Pichenette had been scratched 
by his owner, and this caused some noise.  However, Nana did not do 
more than cross over the course on Labordette's arm.  The bell 
hanging on the flagstaff was ringing persistently to warn people to 
leave the course.

"Ah, my little dears," she said as she got up into her landau again, 
"their enclosure's all humbug!"

She was welcomed with acclamation; people around her clapped their 
hands.

"Bravo, Nana!  Nana's ours again!"

What idiots they were, to be sure!  Did they think she was the sort 
to cut old friends?  She had come back just at the auspicious 
moment.  Now then, 'tenshun!  The race was beginning!  And the 
champagne was accordingly forgotten, and everyone left off drinking.

But Nana was astonished to find Gaga in her carriage, sitting with 
Bijou and Louiset on her knees.  Gaga had indeed decided on this 
course of action in order to be near La Faloise, but she told Nana 
that she had been anxious to kiss Baby.  She adored children.

"By the by, what about Lili?" asked Nana.  "That's certainly she 
over there in that old fellow's brougham.  They've just told me 
something very nice!"

Gaga had adopted a lachrymose expression.

"My dear, it's made me ill," she said dolorously.  "Yesterday I had 
to keep my bed, I cried so, and today I didn't think I should be 
able to come.  You know what my opinions were, don't you?  I didn't 
desire that kind of thing at all.  I had her educated in a convent 
with a view to a good marriage.  And then to think of the strict 
advice she had and the constant watching!  Well, my dear, it was she 
who wished it.  We had such a scene--tears--disagreeable speeches!  
It even got to such a point that I caught her a box on the ear.  She 
was too much bored by existence, she said; she wanted to get out of 
it.  By and by, when she began to say, ''Tisn't you, after all, 
who've got the right to prevent me,' I said to her: 'you're a 
miserable wretch; you're bringing dishonor upon us.  Begone!'  And 
it was done.  I consented to arrange about it.  But my last hope's 
blooming well blasted, and, oh, I used to dream about such nice 
things!"

The noise of a quarrel caused them to rise.  It was Georges in the 
act of defending Vandeuvres against certain vague rumors which were 
circulating among the various groups.

"Why should you say that he's laying off his own horse?" the young 
man was exclaiming.  "Yesterday in the Salon des Courses he took the 
odds on Lusignan for a thousand louis."

"Yes, I was there," said Philippe in affirmation of this.  "And he 
didn't put a single louis on Nana.  If the betting's ten to one 
against Nana he's got nothing to win there.  It's absurd to imagine 
people are so calculating.  Where would his interest come in?"

Labordette was listening with a quiet expression.  Shrugging his 
shoulders, he said:

"Oh, leave them alone; they must have their say.  The count has 
again laid at least as much as five hundred louis on Lusignan, and 
if he's wanted Nana to run to a hundred louis it's because an owner 
ought always to look as if he believes in his horses."

"Oh, bosh!  What the deuce does that matter to us?" shouted La 
Faloise with a wave of his arms.  "Spirit's going to win!  Down with 
France--bravo, England!"

A long shiver ran through the crowd, while a fresh peal from the 
bell announced the arrival of the horses upon the racecourse.  At 
this Nana got up and stood on one of the seats of her carriage so as 
to obtain a better view, and in so doing she trampled the bouquets 
of roses and myosotis underfoot.  With a sweeping glance she took in 
the wide, vast horizon.  At this last feverish moment the course was 
empty and closed by gray barriers, between the posts of which stood 
a line of policemen.  The strip of grass which lay muddy in front of 
her grew brighter as it stretched away and turned into a tender 
green carpet in the distance.  In the middle landscape, as she 
lowered her eyes, she saw the field swarming with vast numbers of 
people, some on tiptoe, others perched on carriages, and all heaving 
and jostling in sudden passionate excitement.

Horses were neighing; tent canvases flapped, while equestrians urged 
their hacks forward amid a crowd of pedestrians rushing to get 
places along the barriers.  When Nana turned in the direction of the 
stands on the other side the faces seemed diminished, and the dense 
masses of heads were only a confused and motley array, filling 
gangways, steps and terraces and looming in deep, dark, serried 
lines against the sky.  And beyond these again she over looked the 
plain surrounding the course.  Behind the ivy-clad mill to the 
right, meadows, dotted over with great patches of umbrageous wood, 
stretched away into the distance, while opposite to her, as far as 
the Seine flowing at the foot of a hill, the avenues of the park 
intersected one another, filled at that moment with long, motionless 
files of waiting carriages; and in the direction of Boulogne, on the 
left, the landscape widened anew and opened out toward the blue 
distances of Meudon through an avenue of paulownias, whose rosy, 
leafless tops were one stain of brilliant lake color.  People were 
still arriving, and a long procession of human ants kept coming 
along the narrow ribbon of road which crossed the distance, while 
very far away, on the Paris side, the nonpaying public, herding like 
sheep among the wood, loomed in a moving line of little dark spots 
under the trees on the skirts of the Bois.

Suddenly a cheering influence warmed the hundred thousand souls who 
covered this part of the plain like insects swarming madly under the 
vast expanse of heaven.  The sun, which had been hidden for about a 
quarter of an hour, made his appearance again and shone out amid a 
perfect sea of light.  And everything flamed afresh: the women's 
sunshades turned into countless golden targets above the heads of 
the crowd.  The sun was applauded, saluted with bursts of laughter.  
And people stretched their arms out as though to brush apart the 
clouds.

Meanwhile a solitary police officer advanced down the middle of the 
deserted racecourse, while higher up, on the left, a man appeared 
with a red flag in his hand.

"It's the starter, the Baron de Mauriac," said Labordette in reply 
to a question from Nana.  All round the young woman exclamations 
were bursting from the men who were pressing to her very carriage 
step.  They kept up a disconnected conversation, jerking out phrases 
under the immediate influence of passing impressions.  Indeed, 
Philippe and Georges, Bordenave and La Faloise, could not be quiet.

"Don't shove!  Let me see!  Ah, the judge is getting into his box.  
D'you say it's Monsieur de Souvigny?  You must have good eyesight--
eh?--to be able to tell what half a head is out of a fakement like 
that!  Do hold your tongue--the banner's going up.  Here they are--
'tenshun!  Cosinus is the first!"

A red and yellow banner was flapping in mid-air at the top of a 
mast.  The horses came on the course one by one; they were led by 
stableboys, and the jockeys were sitting idle-handed in the saddles, 
the sunlight making them look like bright dabs of color.  After 
Cosinus appeared Hazard and Boum.  Presently a murmur of approval 
greeted Spirit, a magnificent big brown bay, the harsh citron color 
and black of whose jockey were cheerlessly Britannic.  Valerio II 
scored a success as he came in; he was small and very lively, and 
his colors were soft green bordered with pink.  The two Vandeuvres 
horses were slow to make their appearance, but at last, in 
Frangipane's rear, the blue and white showed themselves.  But 
Lusignan, a very dark bay of irreproachable shape, was almost 
forgotten amid the astonishment caused by Nana.  People had not seen 
her looking like this before, for now the sudden sunlight was dyeing 
the chestnut filly the brilliant color of a girl's red-gold hair.  
She was shining in the light like a new gold coin; her chest was 
deep; her head and neck tapered lightly from the delicate, high-
strung line of her long back.

"Gracious, she's got my hair!" cried Nana in an ecstasy.  "You bet 
you know I'm proud of it!"

The men clambered up on the landau, and Bordenave narrowly escaped 
putting his foot on Louiset, whom his mother had forgotten.  He took 
him up with an outburst of paternal grumbling and hoisted him on his 
shoulder, muttering at the same time:

"The poor little brat, he must be in it too!  Wait a bit, I'll show 
you Mamma.  Eh?  Look at Mummy out there."

And as Bijou was scratching his legs, he took charge of him, too, 
while Nana, rejoicing in the brute that bore her name, glanced round 
at the other women to see how they took it.  They were all raging 
madly.  Just then on the summit of her cab the Tricon, who had not 
moved till that moment, began waving her hand and giving her 
bookmaker her orders above the heads of the crowd.  Her instinct had 
at last prompted her; she was backing Nana.

La Faloise meanwhile was making an insufferable noise.  He was 
getting wild over Frangipane.

"I've an inspiration," he kept shouting.  "Just look at Frangipane.  
What an action, eh?  I back Frangipane at eight to one.  Who'll take 
me?"

"Do keep quiet now," said Labordette at last.  "You'll be sorry for 
it if you do."

"Frangipane's a screw," Philippe declared.  "He's been utterly blown 
upon already.  You'll see the canter."

The horses had gone up to the right, and they now started for the 
preliminary canter, passing in loose order before the stands.  
Thereupon there was a passionate fresh burst of talk, and people all 
spoke at once.

"Lusignan's too long in the back, but he's very fit.  Not a cent, I 
tell you, on Valerio II; he's nervous--gallops with his head up--
it's a bad sign.  Jove!  Burne's riding Spirit.  I tell you, he's 
got no shoulders.  A well-made shoulder--that's the whole secret.  
No, decidedly, Spirit's too quiet.  Now listen, Nana, I saw her 
after the Grande Poule des Produits, and she was dripping and 
draggled, and her sides were trembling like one o'clock.  I lay 
twenty louis she isn't placed!  Oh, shut up!  He's boring us with 
his Frangipane.  There's no time to make a bet now; there, they're 
off!"

Almost in tears, La Faloise was struggling to find a bookmaker.  He 
had to be reasoned with.  Everyone craned forward, but the first go-
off was bad, the starter, who looked in the distance like a slim 
dash of blackness, not having lowered his flag.  The horses came 
back to their places after galloping a moment or two.  There were 
two more false starts.  At length the starter got the horses 
together and sent them away with such address as to elicit shouts of 
applause.

"Splendid!  No, it was mere chance!  Never mind--it's done it!"

The outcries were smothered by the anxiety which tortured every 
breast.  The betting stopped now, and the game was being played on 
the vast course itself.  Silence reigned at the outset, as though 
everyone were holding his breath.  White faces and trembling forms 
were stretched forward in all directions.  At first Hazard and 
Cosinus made the running at the head of the rest; Valerio II 
followed close by, and the field came on in a confused mass behind.  
When they passed in front of the stands, thundering over the ground 
in their course like a sudden stormwind, the mass was already some 
fourteen lengths in extent.  Frangipane was last, and Nana was 
slightly behind Lusignan and Spirit.

"Egad!" muttered Labordette, "how the Englishman is pulling it off 
out there!"

The whole carriageload again burst out with phrases and 
exclamations.  Everyone rose on tiptoe and followed the bright 
splashes of color which were the jockeys as they rushed through the 
sunlight.

At the rise Valerio II took the lead, while Cosinus and Hazard lost 
ground, and Lusignan and Spirit were running neck and neck with Nana 
still behind them.

"By jingo, the Englishman's gained!  It's palpable!" said Bordenave.  
"Lusignan's in difficulties, and Valerio II can't stay."

"Well, it will be a pretty biz if the Englishman wins!" cried 
Philippe in an access of patriotic grief.

A feeling of anguish was beginning to choke all that crowded 
multitude.  Another defeat!  And with that a strange ardent prayer, 
which was almost religious, went up for Lusignan, while people 
heaped abuse on Spirit and his dismal mute of a jockey.  Among the 
crowd scattered over the grass the wind of excitement put up whole 
groups of people and set their boot soles flashing in air as they 
ran.  Horsemen crossed the green at a furious gallop.  And Nana, who 
was slowly revolving on her own axis, saw beneath her a surging 
waste of beasts and men, a sea of heads swayed and stirred all round 
the course by the whirlwind of the race, which clove the horizon 
with the bright lightning flash of the jockeys.  She had been 
following their movement from behind while the cruppers sped away 
and the legs seemed to grow longer as they raced and then diminished 
till they looked slender as strands of hair.  Now the horses were 
running at the end of the course, and she caught a side view of them 
looking minute and delicate of outline against the green distances 
of the Bois.  Then suddenly they vanished behind a great clump of 
trees growing in the middle of the Hippodrome.

"Don't talk about it!" cried Georges, who was still full of hope.  
"It isn't over yet.  The Englishman's touched."

But La Faloise was again seized with contempt for his country and 
grew positively outrageous in his applause of Spirit.  Bravo!  That 
was right!  France needed it!  Spirit first and Frangipane second--
that would be a nasty one for his native land!  He exasperated 
Labordette, who threatened seriously to throw him off the carriage.

"Let's see how many minutes they'll be about it," said Bordenave 
peaceably, for though holding up Louiset, he had taken out his 
watch.

One after the other the horses reappeared from behind the clump of 
trees.  There was stupefaction; a long murmur arose among the crowd.  
Valerio II was still leading, but Spirit was gaining on him, and 
behind him Lusignan had slackened while another horse was taking his 
place.  People could not make this out all at once; they were 
confused about the colors.  Then there was a burst of exclamations.

"But it's Nana!  Nana?  Get along!  I tell you Lusignan hasn't 
budged.  Dear me, yes, it's Nana.  You can certainly recognize her 
by her golden color.  D'you see her now?  She's blazing away.  
Bravo, Nana!  What a ripper she is!  Bah, it doesn't matter a bit: 
she's making the running for Lusignan!"

For some seconds this was everybody's opinion.  But little by little 
the filly kept gaining and gaining, spurting hard all the while.  
Thereupon a vast wave of feeling passed over the crowd, and the tail 
of horses in the rear ceased to interest.  A supreme struggle was 
beginning between Spirit, Nana, Lusignan and Valerio II.  They were 
pointed out; people estimated what ground they had gained or lost in 
disconnected, gasping phrases.  And Nana, who had mounted up on the 
coach box, as though some power had lifted her thither, stood white 
and trembling and so deeply moved as not to be able to speak.  At 
her side Labordette smiled as of old.

"The Englishman's in trouble, eh?" said Philippe joyously.  "He's 
going badly."

"In any case, it's all up with Lusignan," shouted La Faloise.  
"Valerio II is coming forward.  Look, there they are all four 
together."

The same phrase was in every mouth.

"What a rush, my dears!  By God, what a rush!"

The squad of horses was now passing in front of them like a flash of 
lightning.  Their approach was perceptible--the breath of it was as 
a distant muttering which increased at every second.  The whole 
crowd had thrown themselves impetuously against the barriers, and a 
deep clamor issued from innumerable chests before the advance of the 
horses and drew nearer and nearer like the sound of a foaming tide.  
It was the last fierce outburst of colossal partisanship; a hundred 
thousand spectators were possessed by a single passion, burning with 
the same gambler's lust, as they gazed after the beasts, whose 
galloping feet were sweeping millions with them.  The crowd pushed 
and crushed--fists were clenched; people gaped, openmouthed; every 
man was fighting for himself; every man with voice and gesture was 
madly speeding the horse of his choice.  And the cry of all this 
multitude, a wild beast's cry despite the garb of civilization, grew 
ever more distinct:

"Here they come!  Here they come!  Here they come!"

But Nana was still gaining ground, and now Valerio II was distanced, 
and she was heading the race, with Spirit two or three necks behind.  
The rolling thunder of voices had increased.  They were coming in; a 
storm of oaths greeted them from the landau.

"Gee up, Lusignan, you great coward!  The Englishman's stunning!  Do 
it again, old boy; do it again!  Oh, that Valerio!  It's sickening!  
Oh, the carcass!  My ten louis damned well lost!  Nana's the only 
one!  Bravo, Nana!  Bravo!"

And without being aware of it Nana, upon her seat, had begun jerking 
her hips and waist as though she were racing herself.  She kept 
striking her side--she fancied it was a help to the filly.  With 
each stroke she sighed with fatigue and said in low, anguished 
tones:

"Go it, go it!"

Then a splendid sight was witnessed.  Price, rising in his stirrups 
and brandishing his whip, flogged Nana with an arm of iron.  The old 
shriveled-up child with his long, hard, dead face seemed to breath 
flame.  And in a fit of furious audacity and triumphant will he put 
his heart into the filly, held her up, lifted her forward, drenched 
in foam, with eyes of blood.  The whole rush of horses passed with a 
roar of thunder: it took away people's breaths; it swept the air 
with it while the judge sat frigidly waiting, his eye adjusted to 
its task.  Then there was an immense re-echoing burst of 
acclamation.  With a supreme effort Price had just flung Nana past 
the post, thus beating Spirit by a head.

There was an uproar as of a rising tide.  "Nana!  Nana!  Nana!"  The 
cry rolled up and swelled with the violence of a tempest, till 
little by little it filled the distance, the depths of the Bois as 
far as Mont Valerien, the meadows of Longchamps and the Plaine de 
Boulogne.  In all parts of the field the wildest enthusiasm declared 
itself.  "Vive Nana!  Vive la France!  Down with England!"  The 
women waved their sunshades; men leaped and spun round, vociferating 
as they did so, while others with shouts of nervous laughter threw 
their hats in the air.  And from the other side of the course the 
enclosure made answer; the people on the stands were stirred, though 
nothing was distinctly visible save a tremulous motion of the air, 
as though an invisible flame were burning in a brazier above the 
living mass of gesticulating arms and little wildly moving faces, 
where the eyes and gaping mouths looked like black dots.  The noise 
did not cease but swelled up and recommenced in the recesses of 
faraway avenues and among the people encamped under the trees, till 
it spread on and on and attained its climax in the imperial stand, 
where the empress herself had applauded.  "Nana!  Nana!  Nana!"  The 
cry rose heavenward in the glorious sunlight, whose golden rain beat 
fiercely on the dizzy heads of the multitude.

Then Nana, looming large on the seat of her landau, fancied that it 
was she whom they were applauding.  For a moment or two she had 
stood devoid of motion, stupefied by her triumph, gazing at the 
course as it was invaded by so dense a flood of people that the turf 
became invisible beneath the sea of black hats.  By and by, when 
this crowd had become somewhat less disorderly and a lane had been 
formed as far as the exit and Nana was again applauded as she went 
off with Price hanging lifelessly and vacantly over her neck, she 
smacked her thigh energetically, lost all self-possession, triumphed 
in crude phrases:

"Oh, by God, it's me; it's me.  Oh, by God, what luck!"

And, scarce knowing how to give expression to her overwhelming joy, 
she hugged and kissed Louiset, whom she now discovered high in the 
air on Bordenave's shoulder.

"Three minutes and fourteen seconds," said the latter as he put his 
watch back in his pocket.

Nana kept hearing her name; the whole plain was echoing it back to 
her.  Her people were applauding her while she towered above them in 
the sunlight, in the splendor of her starry hair and white-and-sky-
blue dress.  Labordette, as he made off, had just announced to her a 
gain of two thousand louis, for he had put her fifty on Nana at 
forty to one.  But the money stirred her less than this unforeseen 
victory, the fame of which made her queen of Paris.  All the other 
ladies were losers.  With a raging movement Rose Mignon had snapped 
her sunshade, and Caroline Hequet and Clarisse and Simonne--nay, 
Lucy Stewart herself, despite the presence of her son--were swearing 
low in their exasperation at that great wench's luck, while the 
Tricon, who had made the sign of the cross at both start and finish, 
straightened up her tall form above them, went into an ecstasy over 
her intuition and damned Nana admiringly as became an experienced 
matron.

Meanwhile round the landau the crush of men increased.  The band of 
Nana's immediate followers had made a fierce uproar, and now 
Georges, choking with emotion, continued shouting all by himself in 
breaking tones.  As the champagne had given out, Philippe, taking 
the footmen with him, had run to the wine bars.  Nana's court was 
growing and growing, and her present triumph caused many loiterers 
to join her.  Indeed, that movement which had made her carriage a 
center of attraction to the whole field was now ending in an 
apotheosis, and Queen Venus was enthroned amid suddenly maddened 
subjects.  Bordenave, behind her, was muttering oaths, for he 
yearned to her as a father.  Steiner himself had been reconquered--
he had deserted Simonne and had hoisted himself upon one of Nana's 
carriage steps.  When the champagne had arrived, when she lifted her 
brimming glass, such applause burst forth, and "Nana!  Nana!  Nana!" 
was so loudly repeated that the crowd looked round in astonishment 
for the filly, nor could any tell whether it was the horse or the 
woman that filled all hearts.

While this was going on Mignon came hastening up in defiance of 
Rose's terrible frown.  That confounded girl simply maddened him, 
and he wanted to kiss her.  Then after imprinting a paternal salute 
on both her cheeks:

"What bothers me," he said, "is that now Rose is certainly going to 
send the letter.  She's raging, too, fearfully."

"So much the better!  It'll do my business for me!" Nana let slip.

But noting his utter astonishment, she hastily continued:

"No, no, what am I saying?  Indeed, I don't rightly know what I'm 
saying now!  I'm drunk."

And drunk, indeed, drunk with joy, drunk with sunshine, she still 
raised her glass on high and applauded herself.

"To Nana!  To Nana!" she cried amid a redoubled uproar of laughter 
and bravoes, which little by little overspread the whole Hippodrome.

The races were ending, and the Prix Vaublanc was run for.  Carriages 
began driving off one by one.  Meanwhile, amid much disputing, the 
name of Vandeuvres was again mentioned.  It was quite evident now: 
for two years past Vandeuvres had been preparing his final stroke 
and had accordingly told Gresham to hold Nana in, while he had only 
brought Lusignan forward in order to make play for the filly.  The 
losers were vexed; the winners shrugged their shoulders.  After all, 
wasn't the thing permissible?  An owner was free to run his stud in 
his own way.  Many others had done as he had!  In fact, the majority 
thought Vandeuvres had displayed great skill in raking in all he 
could get about Nana through the agency of friends, a course of 
action which explained the sudden shortening of the odds.  People 
spoke of his having laid two thousand louis on the horse, which, 
supposing the odds to be thirty to one against, gave him twelve 
hundred thousand francs, an amount so vast as to inspire respect and 
to excuse everything.

But other rumors of a very serious nature were being whispered 
about: they issued in the first instance from the enclosure, and the 
men who returned thence were full of exact particulars.  Voices were 
raised; an atrocious scandal began to be openly canvassed.  That 
poor fellow Vandeuvres was done for; he had spoiled his splendid hit 
with a piece of flat stupidity, an idiotic robbery, for he had 
commissioned Marechal, a shady bookmaker, to lay two thousand louis 
on his account against Lusignan, in order thereby to get back his 
thousand and odd openly wagered louis.  It was a miserable business, 
and it proved to be the last rift necessary to the utter breakup of 
his fortune.  The bookmaker being thus warned that the favorite 
would not win, had realized some sixty thousand francs over the 
horse.  Only Labordette, for lack of exact and detailed 
instructions, had just then gone to him to put two hundred louis on 
Nana, which the bookmaker, in his ignorance of the stroke actually 
intended, was still quoting at fifty to one against.  Cleared of one 
hundred thousand francs over the filly and a loser to the tune of 
forty thousand, Marechal, who felt the world crumbling under his 
feet, had suddenly divined the situation when he saw the count and 
Labordette talking together in front of the enclosure just after the 
race was over.  Furious, as became an ex-coachman of the count's, 
and brutally frank as only a cheated man can be, he had just made a 
frightful scene in public, had told the whole story in atrocious 
terms and had thrown everyone into angry excitement.  It was further 
stated that the stewards were about to meet.

Nana, whom Philippe and Georges were whisperingly putting in 
possession of the facts, gave vent to a series of reflections and 
yet ceased not to laugh and drink.  After all, it was quite likely; 
she remembered such things, and then that Marechal had a dirty, 
hangdog look.  Nevertheless, she was still rather doubtful when 
Labordette appeared.  He was very white.

"Well?" she asked in a low voice.

"Bloody well smashed up!" he replied simply.

And he shrugged his shoulders.  That Vandeuvres was a mere child!  
She made a bored little gesture.

That evening at the Bal Mabille Nana obtained a colossal success.  
When toward ten o'clock she made her appearance, the uproar was 
afready formidable.  That classic night of madness had brought 
together all that was young and pleasure loving, and now this smart 
world was wallowing in the coarseness and imbecility of the 
servants' hall.  There was a fierce crush under the festoons of gas 
lamps, and men in evening coats and women in outrageous low-necked 
old toilets, which they did not mind soiling, were howling and 
surging to and fro under the maddening influence of a vast drunken 
fit.  At a distance of thirty paces the brass instruments of the 
orchestra were inaudible.  Nobody was dancing.  Stupid witticisms, 
repeated no one knew why, were going the round of the various 
groups.  People were straining after wit without succeeding in being 
funny.  Seven women, imprisoned in the cloakroom, were crying to be 
set free.  A shallot had been found, put up to auction and knocked 
down at two louis.  Just then Nana arrived, still wearing her blue-
and-white racecourse costume, and amid a thunder of applause the 
shallot was presented to her.  People caught hold of her in her own 
despite, and three gentlemen bore her triumphantly into the garden, 
across ruined grassplots and ravaged masses of greenery.  As the 
bandstand presented an obstacle to her advance, it was taken by 
storm, and chairs and music stands were smashed.  A paternal police 
organized the disorder.

It was only on Tuesday that Nana recovered from the excitements of 
victory.  That morning she was chatting with Mme Lerat, the old lady 
having come in to bring her news of Louiset, whom the open air had 
upset.  A long story, which was occupying the attention of all 
Paris, interested her beyond measure.  Vandeuvres, after being 
warned off all racecourses and posted at the Cercle Imperial on the 
very evening after the disaster, had set fire to his stable on the 
morrow and had burned himself and his horses to death.

"He certainly told me he was going to," the young woman kept saying.  
"That man was a regular maniac!  Oh, how they did frighten me when 
they told me about it yesterday evening!  You see, he might easily 
have murdered me some fine night.  And besides, oughtn't he to have 
given me a hint about his horse?  I should at any rate have made my 
fortune!  He said to Labordette that if I knew about the matter I 
would immediately inform my hairdresser and a whole lot of other 
men.  How polite, eh?  Oh dear, no, I certainly can't grieve much 
for him."

After some reflection she had grown very angry.  Just then 
Labordette came in; he had seen about her bets and was now the 
bearer of some forty thousand francs.  This only added to her bad 
temper, for she ought to have gained a million.  Labordette, who 
during the whole of this episode had been pretending entire 
innocence, abandoned Vandeuvres in decisive terms.  Those old 
families, he opined, were worn out and apt to make a stupid ending.

"Oh dear no!" said Nana.  "It isn't stupid to burn oneself in one's 
stable as he did.  For my part, I think he made a dashing finish; 
but, oh, you know, I'm not defending that story about him and 
Marechal.  It's too silly.  Just to think that Blanche has had the 
cheek to want to lay the blame of it on me!  I said to her: 'Did I 
tell him to steal?'  Don't you think one can ask a man for money 
without urging him to commit crime?  If he had said to me, 'I've got 
nothing left,' I should have said to him, 'All right, let's part.'  
And the matter wouldn't have gone further."

"Just so," said the aunt gravely "When men are obstinate about a 
thing, so much the worse for them!"

"But as to the merry little finish up, oh, that was awfully smart!" 
continued Nana.  "It appears to have been terrible enough to give 
you the shudders!  He sent everybody away and boxed himself up in 
the place with a lot of petroleum.  And it blazed!  You should have 
seen it!  Just think, a great big affair, almost all made of wood 
and stuffed with hay and straw!  The flames simply towered up, and 
the finest part of the business was that the horses didn't want to 
be roasted.  They could be heard plunging, throwing themselves 
against the doors, crying aloud just like human beings.  Yes, people 
haven't got rid of the horror of it yet."

Labordette let a low, incredulous whistle escape him.  For his part, 
he did not believe in the death of Vandeuvres.  Somebody had sworn 
he had seen him escaping through a window.  He had set fire to his 
stable in a fit of aberration, but when it had begun to grow too 
warm it must have sobered him.  A man so besotted about the women 
and so utterly worn out could not possibly die so pluckily.

Nana listened in her disillusionment and could only remark:

"Oh, the poor wretch, it was so beautiful!"



CHAPTER XII


Toward one in the morning, in the great bed of the Venice point 
draperies, Nana and the count lay still awake.  He had returned to 
her that evening after a three days sulking fit.  The room, which 
was dimly illumined by a lamp, seemed to slumber amid a warm, damp 
odor of love, while the furniture, with its white lacquer and silver 
incrustations, loomed vague and wan through the gloom.  A curtain 
had been drawn to, so that the bed lay flooded with shadow.  A sigh 
became audible; then a kiss broke the silence, and Nana, slipping 
off the coverlet, sat for a moment or two, barelegged, on the edge 
of the bed.  The count let his head fall back on the pillow and 
remained in darkness.

"Dearest, you believe in the good God, don't you?" she queried after 
some moments' reflection.  Her face was serious; she had been 
overcome by pious terrors on quitting her lover's arms.

Since morning, indeed, she had been complaining of feeling 
uncomfortable, and all her stupid notions, as she phrased it, 
notions about death and hell, were secretly torturing her.  From 
time to time she had nights such as these, during which childish 
fears and atrocious fancies would thrill her with waking nightmares.  
She continued:

"I say, d'you think I shall go to heaven?"

And with that she shivered, while the count, in his surprise at her 
putting such singular questions at such a moment, felt his old 
religious remorse returning upon him.  Then with her chemise 
slipping from her shoulders and her hair unpinned, she again threw 
herself upon his breast, sobbing and clinging to him as she did so.

"I'm afraid of dying!  I'm afraid of dying!"  He had all the trouble 
in the world to disengage himself.  Indeed, he was himself afraid of 
giving in to the sudden madness of this woman clinging to his body 
in her dread of the Invisible.  Such dread is contagious, and he 
reasoned with her.  Her conduct was perfect--she had only to conduct 
herself well in order one day to merit pardon.  But she shook her 
head.  Doubtless she was doing no one any harm; nay, she was even in 
the constant habit of wearing a medal of the Virgin, which she 
showed to him as it hung by a red thread between her breasts. Only 
it had been foreordained that all unmarried women who held 
conversation with men would go to hell.  Scraps of her catechism 
recurred to her remembrance.  Ah, if one only knew for certain, but, 
alas, one was sure of nothing; nobody ever brought back any 
information, and then, truly, it would be stupid to bother oneself 
about things if the priests were talking foolishness all the time.  
Nevertheless, she religiously kissed her medal, which was still warm 
from contact with her skin, as though by way of charm against death, 
the idea of which filled her with icy horror.  Muffat was obliged to 
accompany her into the dressing room, for she shook at the idea of 
being alone there for one moment, even though she had left the door 
open.  When he had lain down again she still roamed about the room, 
visiting its several corners and starting and shivering at the 
slightest noise.  A mirror stopped her, and as of old she lapsed 
into obvious contemplation of her nakedness.  But the sight of her 
breast, her waist and her thighs only doubled her terror, and she 
ended by feeling with both hands very slowly over the bones of her 
face.

"You're ugly when you're dead," she said in deliberate tones.

And she pressed her cheeks, enlarging her eyes and pushing down her 
jaw, in order to see how she would look.  Thus disfigured, she 
turned toward the count.

"Do look!  My head'll be quite small, it will!"

At this he grew vexed.

"You're mad; come to bed!"

He fancied he saw her in a grave, emaciated by a century of sleep, 
and he joined his hands and stammered a prayer.  It was some time 
ago that the religious sense had reconquered him, and now his daily 
access of faith had again assumed the apoplectic intensity which was 
wont to leave him well-nigh stunned.  The joints of his fingers used 
to crack, and he would repeat without cease these words only: "My 
God, my God, my God!"  It was the cry of his impotence, the cry of 
that sin against which, though his damnation was certain, he felt 
powerless to strive.  When Nana returned she found him hidden 
beneath the bedclothes; he was haggard; he had dug his nails into 
his bosom, and his eyes stared upward as though in search of heaven.  
And with that she started to weep again.  Then they both embraced, 
and their teeth chattered they knew not why, as the same imbecile 
obsession over-mastered them.  They had already passed a similar 
night, but on this occasion the thing was utterly idiotic, as Nana 
declared when she ceased to be frightened.  She suspected something, 
and this caused her to question the count in a prudent sort of way.  
It might be that Rose Mignon had sent the famous letter!  But that 
was not the case; it was sheer fright, nothing more, for he was 
still ignorant whether he was a cuckold or no.

Two days later, after a fresh disappearance, Muffat presented 
himself in the morning, a time of day at which he never came.  He 
was livid; his eyes were red and his whole man still shaken by a 
great internal struggle.  But Zoe, being scared herself, did not 
notice his troubled state.  She had run to meet him and now began 
crying:

"Oh, monsieur, do come in!  Madame nearly died yesterday evening!"

And when he asked for particulars:

"Something it's impossible to believe has happened--a miscarriage, 
monsieur."

Nana had been in the family way for the past three months.  For long 
she had simply thought herself out of sorts, and Dr Boutarel had 
himself been in doubt.  But when afterward he made her a decisive 
announcement, she felt so bored thereby that she did all she 
possibly could to disguise her condition.  Her nervous terrors, her 
dark humors, sprang to some extent from this unfortunate state of 
things, the secret of which she kept very shamefacedly, as became a 
courtesan mother who is obliged to conceal her plight.  The thing 
struck her as a ridiculous accident, which made her appear small in 
her own eyes and would, had it been known, have led people to chaff 
her.

"A poor joke, eh?" she said.  "Bad luck, too, certainly."

She was necessarily very sharp set when she thought her last hour 
had come.  There was no end to her surprise, too; her sexual economy 
seemed to her to have got out of order; it produced children then 
even when one did not want them and when one employed it for quite 
other purposes!  Nature drove her to exasperation; this appearance 
of serious motherhood in a career of pleasure, this gift of life 
amid all the deaths she was spreading around, exasperated her.  Why 
could one not dispose of oneself as fancy dictated, without all this 
fuss?  And whence had this brat come?  She could not even suggest a 
father.  Ah, dear heaven, the man who made him would have a splendid 
notion had he kept him in his own hands, for nobody asked for him; 
he was in everybody's way, and he would certainly not have much 
happiness in life!

Meanwhile Zoe described the catastrophe.

"Madame was seized with colic toward four o'clock.  When she didn't 
come back out of the dressing room I went in and found her lying 
stretched on the floor in a faint.  Yes, monsieur, on the floor in a 
pool of blood, as though she had been murdered.  Then I understood, 
you see.  I was furious; Madame might quite well have confided her 
trouble to me.  As it happened, Monsieur Georges was there, and he 
helped me to lift her up, and directly a miscarriage was mentioned 
he felt ill in his turn!  Oh, it's true I've had the hump since 
yesterday!"

In fact, the house seemed utterly upset.  All the servants were 
galloping upstairs, downstairs and through the rooms.  Georges had 
passed the night on an armchair in the drawing room.  It was he who 
had announced the news to Madame's friends at that hour of the 
evening when Madame was in the habit of receiving.  He had still 
been very pale, and he had told his story very feelingly, and as 
though stupefied.  Steiner, La Faloise, Philippe and others, 
besides, had presented themselves, and at the end of the lad's first 
phrase they burst into exclamations.  The thing was impossible!  It 
must be a farce!  After which they grew serious and gazed with an 
embarrassed expression at her bedroom door.  They shook their heads; 
it was no laughing matter.

Till midnight a dozen gentlemen had stood talking in low voices in 
front of the fireplace.  All were friends; all were deeply exercised 
by the same idea of paternity.  They seemed to be mutually excusing 
themselves, and they looked as confused as if they had done 
something clumsy.  Eventually, however, they put a bold face on the 
matter.  It had nothing to do with them: the fault was hers!  What a 
stunner that Nana was, eh?  One would never have believed her 
capable of such a fake!  And with that they departed one by one, 
walking on tiptoe, as though in a chamber of death where you cannot 
laugh.

"Come up all the same, monsieur," said Zoe to Muffat.  "Madame is 
much better and will see you.  We are expecting the doctor, who 
promised to come back this morning."

The lady's maid had persuaded Georges to go back home to sleep, and 
upstairs in the drawing room only Satin remained.  She lay stretched 
on a divan, smoking a cigarette and scanning the ceiling.  Amid the 
household scare which had followed the accident she had been white 
with rage, had shrugged her shoulders violently and had made 
ferocious remarks.  Accordingly, when Zoe was passing in front of 
her and telling Monsieur that poor, dear Madame had suffered a great 
deal:

"That's right; it'll teach him!" said Satin curtly.

They turned round in surprise, but she had not moved a muscle; her 
eyes were still turned toward the ceiling, and her cigarette was 
still wedged tightly between her lips.

"Dear me, you're charming, you are!" said Zoe.

But Satin sat up, looked savagely at the count and once more hurled 
her remark at him.

"That's right; it'll teach him!"

And she lay down again and blew forth a thin jet of smoke, as though 
she had no interest in present events and were resolved not to 
meddle in any of them.  No, it was all too silly!

Zoe, however, introduced Muffat into the bedroom, where a scent of 
ether lingered amid warm, heavy silence, scarce broken by the dull 
roll of occasional carriages in the Avenue de Villiers.  Nana, 
looking very white on her pillow, was lying awake with wide-open, 
meditative eyes.  She smiled when she saw the count but did not 
move.

"Ah, dear pet!" she slowly murmured.  "I really thought I should 
never see you again."

Then as he leaned forward to kiss her on the hair, she grew tender 
toward him and spoke frankly about the child, as though he were its 
father.

"I never dared tell you; I felt so happy about it!  Oh, I used to 
dream about it; I should have liked to be worthy of you!  And now 
there's nothing left.  Ah well, perhaps that's best.  I don't want 
to bring a stumbling block into your life."

Astounded by this story of paternity, he began stammering vague 
phrases.  He had taken a chair and had sat down by the bed, leaning 
one arm on the coverlet.  Then the young woman noticed his wild 
expression, the blood reddening his eyes, the fever that set his 
lips aquiver.

"What's the matter then?" she asked.  "You're ill too."

"No," he answered with extreme difficulty.

She gazed at him with a profound expression.  Then she signed to Zoe 
to retire, for the latter was lingering round arranging the medicine 
bottles.  And when they were alone she drew him down to her and 
again asked:

"What's the matter with you, darling?  The tears are ready to burst 
from your eyes--I can see that quite well.  Well now, speak out; 
you've come to tell me something."

"No, no, I swear I haven't," he blurted out.  But he was choking 
with suffering, and this sickroom, into which he had suddenly 
entered unawares, so worked on his feelings that he burst out 
sobbing and buried his face in the bedclothes to smother the 
violence of his grief.  Nana understood.  Rose Mignon had most 
assuredly decided to send the letter.  She let him weep for some 
moments, and he was shaken by convulsions so fierce that the bed 
trembled under her.  At length in accents of motherly compassion she 
queried:

"You've had bothers at your home?"

He nodded affirmatively.  She paused anew, and then very low:

"Then you know all?"

He nodded assent.  And a heavy silence fell over the chamber of 
suffering.  The night before, on his return from a party given by 
the empress, he had received the letter Sabine had written her 
lover.  After an atrocious night passed in the meditation of 
vengeance he had gone out in the morning in order to resist a 
longing which prompted him to kill his wife.  Outside, under a 
sudden, sweet influence of a fine June morning, he had lost the 
thread of his thoughts and had come to Nana's, as he always came at 
terrible moments in his life.  There only he gave way to his misery, 
for he felt a cowardly joy at the thought that she would console 
him.

"Now look here, be calm!" the young woman continued, becoming at the 
same time extremely kind.  "I've known it a long time, but it was 
certainly not I that would have opened your eyes.  You remember you 
had your doubts last year, but then things arranged themselves, 
owing to my prudence.  In fact, you wanted proofs.  The deuce, 
you've got one today, and I know it's hard lines.  Nevertheless, you 
must look at the matter quietly: you're not dishonored because it's 
happened."

He had left off weeping.  A sense of shame restrained him from 
saying what he wanted to, although he had long ago slipped into the 
most intimate confessions about his household.  She had to encourage 
him.  Dear me, she was a woman; she could understand everything.  
When in a dull voice he exclaimed:

"You're ill.  What's the good of tiring you?  It was stupid of me to 
have come.  I'm going--"

"No," she answered briskly enough.  "Stay!  Perhaps I shall be able 
to give you some good advice.  Only don't make me talk too much; the 
medical man's forbidden it."

He had ended by rising, and he was now walking up and down the room.  
Then she questioned him:

"Now what are you going to do?

"I'm going to box the man's ears--by heavens, yes!"

She pursed up her lips disapprovingly.

"That's not very wise.  And about your wife?"

"I shall go to law; I've proofs."

"Not at all wise, my dear boy.  It's stupid even.  You know I shall 
never let you do that!"

And in her feeble voice she showed him decisively how useless and 
scandalous a duel and a trial would be.  He would be a nine days' 
newspaper sensation; his whole existence would be at stake, his 
peace of mind, his high situation at court, the honor of his name, 
and all for what?  That he might have the laughers against him.

"What will it matter?" he cried.  "I shall have had my revenge."

"My pet," she said, "in a business of that kind one never has one's 
revenge if one doesn't take it directly."

He paused and stammered.  He was certainly no poltroon, but he felt 
that she was right.  An uneasy feeling was growing momentarily 
stronger within him, a poor, shameful feeling which softened his 
anger now that it was at its hottest.  Moreover, in her frank desire 
to tell him everything, she dealt him a fresh blow.

"And d'you want to know what's annoying you, dearest?  Why, that you 
are deceiving your wife yourself.  You don't sleep away from home 
for nothing, eh?  Your wife must have her suspicions.  Well then, 
how can you blame her?  She'll tell you that you've set her the 
example, and that'll shut you up.  There, now, that's why you're 
stamping about here instead of being at home murdering both of 'em."

Muffat had again sunk down on the chair; he was overwhelmed by these 
home thrusts.  She broke off and took breath, and then in a low 
voice:

"Oh, I'm a wreck!  Do help me sit up a bit.  I keep slipping down, 
and my head's too low."

When he had helped her she sighed and felt more comfortable.  And 
with that she harked back to the subject.  What a pretty sight a 
divorce suit would be!  Couldn't he imagine the advocate of the 
countess amusing Paris with his remarks about Nana?  Everything 
would have come out--her fiasco at the Varietes, her house, her 
manner of life.  Oh dear, no!  She had no wish for all that amount 
of advertising.  Some dirty women might, perhaps, have driven him to 
it for the sake of getting a thundering big advertisement, but she--
she desired his happiness before all else.  She had drawn him down 
toward her and, after passing her arm around his neck, was nursing 
his head close to hers on the edge of the pillow.  And with that she 
whispered softly:

"Listen, my pet, you shall make it up with your wife."

But he rebelled at this.  It could never be!  His heart was nigh 
breaking at the thought; it was too shameful.  Nevertheless, she 
kept tenderly insisting.

"You shall make it up with your wife.  Come, come, you don't want to 
hear all the world saying that I've tempted you away from your home?  
I should have too vile a reputation!  What would people think of me?  
Only swear that you'll always love me, because the moment you go 
with another woman--"

Tears choked her utterance, and he intervened with kisses and said:

"You're beside yourself; it's impossible!"

"Yes, yes," she rejoined, "you must.  But I'll be reasonable.  After 
all, she's your wife, and it isn't as if you were to play me false 
with the firstcomer."

And she continued in this strain, giving him the most excellent 
advice.  She even spoke of God, and the count thought he was 
listening to M. Venot, when that old gentleman endeavored to 
sermonize him out of the grasp of sin.  Nana, however, did not speak 
of breaking it off entirely: she preached indulgent good nature and 
suggested that, as became a dear, nice old fellow, he should divide 
his attentions between his wife and his mistress, so that they would 
all enjoy a quiet life, devoid of any kind of annoyance, something, 
in fact, in the nature of a happy slumber amid the inevitable 
miseries of existence.  Their life would be nowise changed: he would 
still be the little man of her heart.  Only he would come to her a 
bit less often and would give the countess the nights not passed 
with her.  She had got to the end of her strength and left off, 
speaking under her breath:

"After that I shall feel I've done a good action, and you'll love me 
all the more."

Silence reigned.  She had closed her eyes and lay wan upon her 
pillow.  The count was patiently listening to her, not wishing her 
to tire herself.  A whole minute went by before she reopened her 
eyes and murmured:

"Besides, how about the money?  Where would you get the money from 
if you must grow angry and go to law?  Labordette came for the bill 
yesterday.  As for me, I'm out of everything; I have nothing to put 
on now."

Then she shut her eyes again and looked like one dead.  A shadow of 
deep anguish had passed over Muffat's brow.  Under the present 
stroke he had since yesterday forgotten the money troubles from 
which he knew not how to escape.  Despite formal promises to the 
contrary, the bill for a hundred thousand francs had been put in 
circulation after being once renewed, and Labordette, pretending to 
be very miserable about it, threw all the blame on Francis, 
declaring that he would never again mix himself up in such a matter 
with an uneducated man.  It was necessary to pay, for the count 
would never have allowed his signature to be protested.  Then in 
addition to Nana's novel demands, his home expenses were 
extraordinarily confused.  On their return from Les Fondettes the 
countess had suddenly manifested a taste for luxury, a longing for 
worldly pleasures, which was devouring their fortune.  Her ruinous 
caprices began to be talked about.  Their whole household management 
was altered, and five hundred thousand francs were squandered in 
utterly transforming the old house in the Rue Miromesnil.  Then 
there were extravagantly magnificent gowns and large sums 
disappeared, squandered or perhaps given away, without her ever 
dreaming of accounting for them.  Twice Muffat ventured to mention 
this, for he was anxious to know how the money went, but on these 
occasions she had smiled and gazed at him with so singular an 
expression that he dared not interrogate her further for fear of a 
too-unmistakable answer.  If he were taking Daguenet as son-in-law 
as a gift from Nana it was chiefly with the hope of being able to 
reduce Estelle's dower to two hundred thousand francs and of then 
being free to make any arrangements he chose about the remainder 
with a young man who was still rejoicing in this unexpected match.

Nevertheless, for the last week, under the immediate necessity of 
finding Labordette's hundred thousand francs, Muffat had been able 
to hit on but one expedient, from which he recoiled.  This was that 
he should sell the Bordes, a magnificent property valued at half a 
million, which an uncle had recently left the countess.  However, 
her signature was necessary, and she herself, according to the terms 
of the deed, could not alienate the property without the count's 
authorization.  The day before he had indeed resolved to talk to his 
wife about this signature.  And now everything was ruined; at such a 
moment he would never accept of such a compromise.  This reflection 
added bitterness to the frightful disgrace of the adultery.  He 
fully understood what Nana was asking for, since in that ever-
growing self-abandonment  which prompted him to put her in 
possession of all his secrets, he had complained to her of his 
position and had confided to her the tiresome difficulty he was in 
with regard to the signature of the countess.

Nana, however, did not seem to insist.  She did not open her eyes 
again, and, seeing her so pale, he grew frightened and made her 
inhale a little ether.  She gave a sigh and without mentioning 
Daguenet asked him some questions.

"When is the marriage?"

"We sign the contract on Tuesday, in five days' time," he replied.

Then still keeping her eyelids closed, as though she were speaking 
from the darkness and silence of her brain:

"Well then, pet, see to what you've got to do.  As far as I'm 
concerned, I want everybody to be happy and comfortable."

He took her hand and soothed her.  Yes, he would see about it; the 
important thing now was for her to rest.  And the revolt within him 
ceased, for this warm and slumberous sickroom, with its all-
pervading scent of ether, had ended by lulling him into a mere 
longing for happiness and peace.  All his manhood, erewhile maddened 
by wrong, had departed out of him in the neighborhood of that warm 
bed and that suffering woman, whom he was nursing under the 
influence of her feverish heat and of remembered delights.  He 
leaned over her and pressed her in a close embrace, while despite 
her unmoved features her lips wore a delicate, victorious smile.  
But Dr Boutarel made his appearance.

"Well, and how's this dear child?" he said familiarly to Muffat, 
whom he treated as her husband.  "The deuce, but we've made her 
talk!"

The doctor was a good-looking man and still young.  He had a superb 
practice among the gay world, and being very merry by nature and 
ready to laugh and joke in the friendliest way with the demimonde 
ladies with whom, however, he never went farther, he charged very 
high fees and got them paid with the greatest punctuality.  
Moreover, he would put himself out to visit them on the most trivial 
occasions, and Nana, who was always trembling at the fear of death, 
would send and fetch him two or three times a week and would 
anxiously confide to him little infantile ills which he would cure 
to an accompaniment of amusing gossip and harebrained anecdotes.  
The ladies all adored him.  But this time the little ill was 
serious.

Muffat withdrew, deeply moved.  Seeing his poor Nana so very weak, 
his sole feeling was now one of tenderness.  As he was leaving the 
room she motioned him back and gave him her forehead to kiss.  In a 
low voice and with a playfully threatening look she said:

"You know what I've allowed you to do.  Go back to your wife, or 
it's all over and I shall grow angry!"

The Countess Sabine had been anxious that her daughter's wedding 
contract should be signed on a Tuesday in order that the renovated 
house, where the paint was still scarcely dry, might be reopened 
with a grand entertainment.  Five hundred invitations had been 
issued to people in all kinds of sets.  On the morning of the great 
day the upholsterers were still nailing up hangings, and toward nine 
at night, just when the lusters were going to be lit, the architect, 
accompanied by the eager and interested countess, was given his 
final orders.

It was one of those spring festivities which have a delicate charm 
of their own.  Owing to the warmth of the June nights, it had become 
possible to open the two doors of the great drawing room and to 
extend the dancing floor to the sanded paths of the garden.  When 
the first guests arrived and were welcomed at the door by the count 
and the countess they were positively dazzled.  One had only to 
recall to mind the drawing room of the past, through which flitted 
the icy, ghostly presence of the Countess Muffat, that antique room 
full of an atmosphere of religious austerity with its massive First 

Back to Full Books