[Several] Works by Emile Zola

on her trunk behind the curtain, Satin quietly replied:

"Certainly I didn't want to be in your way with all those men 
there!"

And she added further that she was going now.  But Nana held her 
back.  What a silly girl she was!  Now that Bordenave had agreed to 
take her on!  Why, the bargain was to be struck after the play was 
over!  Satin hesitated.  There were too many bothers; she was out of 
her element!  Nevertheless, she stayed.

As the prince was coming down the little wooden staircase a strange 
sound of smothered oaths and stamping, scuffling feet became audible 
on the other side of the theater.  The actors waiting for their cues 
were being scared by quite a serious episode.  For some seconds past 
Mignon had been renewing his jokes and smothering Fauchery with 
caresses.  He had at last invented a little game of a novel kind and 
had begun flicking the other's nose in order, as he phrased it, to 
keep the flies off him.  This kind of game naturally diverted the 
actors to any extent.

But success had suddenly thrown Mignon off his balance.  He had 
launched forth into extravagant courses and had given the journalist 
a box on the ear, an actual, a vigorous, box on the ear.  This time 
he had gone too far: in the presence of so many spectators it was 
impossible for Fauchery to pocket such a blow with laughing 
equanimity.  Whereupon the two men had desisted from their farce, 
had sprung at one another's throats, their faces livid with hate, 
and were now rolling over and over behind a set of side lights, 
pounding away at each other as though they weren't breakable.

"Monsieur Bordenave, Monsieur Bordenave!" said the stage manager, 
coming up in a terrible flutter.

Bordenave made his excuses to the prince and followed him.  When he 
recognized Fauchery and Mignon in the men on the floor he gave vent 
to an expression of annoyance.  They had chosen a nice time, 
certainly, with His Highness on the other side of the scenery and 
all that houseful of people who might have overheard the row!  To 
make matters worse, Rose Mignon arrived out of breath at the very 
moment she was due on the stage.  Vulcan, indeed, was giving her the 
cue, but Rose stood rooted to the ground, marveling at sight of her 
husband and her lover as they lay wallowing at her feet, strangling 
one another, kicking, tearing their hair out and whitening their 
coats with dust.  They barred the way.  A sceneshifter had even 
stopped Fauchery's hat just when the devilish thing was going to 
bound onto the stage in the middle of the struggle.  Meanwhile 
Vulcan, who had been gagging away to amuse the audience, gave Rose 
her cue a second time.  But she stood motionless, still gazing at 
the two men.

"Oh, don't look at THEM!" Bordenave furiously whispered to her.  "Go 
on the stage; go on, do!  It's no business of yours!  Why, you're 
missing your cue!"

And with a push from the manager, Rose stepped over the prostrate 
bodies and found herself in the flare of the footlights and in the 
presence of the audience.  She had quite failed to understand why 
they were fighting on the floor behind her.  Trembling from head to 
foot and with a humming in her ears, she came down to the 
footlights, Diana's sweet, amorous smile on her lips, and attacked 
the opening lines of her duet with so feeling a voice that the 
public gave her a veritable ovation.

Behind the scenery she could hear the dull thuds caused by the two 
men.  They had rolled down to the wings, but fortunately the music 
covered the noise made by their feet as they kicked against them.

"By God!" yelled Bordenave in exasperation when at last he had 
succeeded in separating them.  "Why couldn't you fight at home?  You 
know as well as I do that I don't like this sort of thing.  You, 
Mignon, you'll do me the pleasure of staying over here on the prompt 
side, and you, Fauchery, if you leave the O.P. side I'll chuck you 
out of the theater.  You understand, eh?  Prompt side and O.P. side 
or I forbid Rose to bring you here at all."

When he returned to the prince's presence the latter asked what was 
the matter.

"Oh, nothing at all," he murmured quietly.

Nana was standing wrapped in furs, talking to these gentlemen while 
awaiting her cue.  As Count Muffat was coming up in order to peep 
between two of the wings at the stage, he understood from a sign 
made him by the stage manager that he was to step softly.  Drowsy 
warmth was streaming down from the flies, and in the wings, which 
were lit by vivid patches of light, only a few people remained, 
talking in low voices or making off on tiptoe.  The gasman was at 
his post amid an intricate arrangement of cocks; a fireman, leaning 
against the side lights, was craning forward, trying to catch a 
glimpse of things, while on his seat, high up, the curtain man was 
watching with resigned expression, careless of the play, constantly 
on the alert for the bell to ring him to his duty among the ropes.  
And amid the close air and the shuffling of feet and the sound of 
whispering, the voices of the actors on the stage sounded strange, 
deadened, surprisingly discordant.  Farther off again, above the 
confused noises of the band, a vast breathing sound was audible.  It 
was the breath of the house, which sometimes swelled up till it 
burst in vague rumors, in laughter, in applause.  Though invisible, 
the presence of the public could be felt, even in the silences.

"There's something open," said Nana sharply, and with that she 
tightened the folds of her fur cloak.  "Do look, Barillot.  I bet 
they've just opened a window.  Why, one might catch one's death of 
cold here!"

Barillot swore that he had closed every window himself but suggested 
that possibly there were broken panes about.  The actors were always 
complaining of drafts.  Through the heavy warmth of that gaslit 
region blasts of cold air were constantly passing--it was a regular 
influenza trap, as Fontan phrased it.

"I should like to see YOU in a low-cut dress," continued Nana, 
growing annoyed.

"Hush!" murmured Bordenave.

On the stage Rose rendered a phrase in her duet so cleverly that the 
stalls burst into universal applause.  Nana was silent at this, and 
her face grew grave.  Meanwhile the count was venturing down a 
passage when Barillot stopped him and said he would make a discovery 
there.  Indeed, he obtained an oblique back view of the scenery and 
of the wings which had been strengthened, as it were, by a thick 
layer of old posters.  Then he caught sight of a corner of the 
stage, of the Etna cave hollowed out in a silver mine and of 
Vulcan's forge in the background.  Battens, lowered from above, lit 
up a sparkling substance which had been laid on with large dabs of 
the brush.  Side lights with red glasses and blue were so placed as 
to produce the appearance of a fiery brazier, while on the floor of 
the stage, in the far background, long lines of gaslight had been 
laid down in order to throw a wall of dark rocks into sharp relief.  
Hard by on a gentle, "practicable" incline, amid little points of 
light resembling the illumination lamps scattered about in the grass 
on the night of a public holiday, old Mme Drouard, who played Juno, 
was sitting dazed and sleepy, waiting for her cue.

Presently there was a commotion, for Simonne, while listening to a 
story Clarisse was telling her, cried out:

"My!  It's the Tricon!"

It was indeed the Tricon, wearing the same old curls and looking as 
like a litigious great lady as ever.

When she saw Nana she went straight up to her.

"No," said the latter after some rapid phrases had been exchanged, 
"not now."  The old lady looked grave.  Just then Prulliere passed 
by and shook hands with her, while two little chorus girls stood 
gazing at her with looks of deep emotion.  For a moment she seemed 
to hesitate.  Then she beckoned to Simonne, and the rapid exchange 
of sentences began again.

"Yes," said Simonne at last.  "In half an hour."

But as she was going upstairs again to her dressing room, Mme Bron, 
who was once more going the rounds with letters, presented one to 
her.  Bordenave lowered his voice and furiously reproached the 
portress for having allowed the Tricon to come in.  That woman!  And 
on such an evening of all others!  It made him so angry because His 
Highness was there!  Mme Bron, who had been thirty years in the 
theater, replied quite sourly.  How was she to know? she asked.  The 
Tricon did business with all the ladies--M. le Directeur had met her 
a score of times without making remarks.  And while Bordenave was 
muttering oaths the Tricon stood quietly by, scrutinizing the prince 
as became a woman who weighs a man at a glance.  A smile lit up her 
yellow face.  Presently she paced slowly off through the crowd of 
deeply deferential little women.

"Immediately, eh?" she queried, turning round again to Simonne.

Simonne seemed much worried.  The letter was from a young man to 
whom she had engaged herself for that evening.  She gave Mme Bron a 
scribbled note in which were the words, "Impossible tonight, 
darling--I'm booked."  But she was still apprehensive; the young man 
might possibly wait for her in spite of everything.  As she was not 
playing in the third act, she had a mind to be off at once and 
accordingly begged Clarisse to go and see if the man were there.  
Clarisse was only due on the stage toward the end of the act, and so 
she went downstairs while Simonne ran up for a minute to their 
common dressing room.

In Mme Bron's drinking bar downstairs a super, who was charged with 
the part of Pluto, was drinking in solitude amid the folds of a 
great red robe diapered with golden flames.  The little business 
plied by the good portress must have been progressing finely, for 
the cellarlike hole under the stairs was wet with emptied heeltaps 
and water.  Clarisse picked up the tunic of Iris, which was dragging 
over the greasy steps behind her, but she halted prudently at the 
turn in the stairs and was content simply to crane forward and peer 
into the lodge.  She certainly had been quick to scent things out!  
Just fancy!  That idiot La Faloise was still there, sitting on the 
same old chair between the table and the stove!  He had made 
pretense of sneaking off in front of Simonne and had returned after 
her departure.  For the matter of that, the lodge was still full of 
gentlemen who sat there gloved, elegant, submissive and patient as 
ever.  They were all waiting and viewing each other gravely as they 
waited.  On the table there were now only some dirty plates, Mme 
Bron having recently distributed the last of the bouquets.  A single 
fallen rose was withering on the floor in the neighborhood of the 
black cat, who had lain down and curled herself up while the kittens 
ran wild races and danced fierce gallops among the gentlemen's legs.  
Clarisse was momentarily inclined to turn La Faloise out.  The idiot 
wasn't fond of animals, and that put the finishing touch to him!  He 
was busy drawing in his legs because the cat was there, and he 
didn't want to touch her.

"He'll nip you; take care!" said Pluto, who was a joker, as he went 
upstairs, wiping his mouth with the back of his hand.

After that Clarisse gave up the idea of hauling La Faloise over the 
coals.  She had seen Mme Bron giving the letter to Simonne's young 
man, and he had gone out to read it under the gas light in the 
lobby.  "Impossible tonight, darling--I'm booked."  And with that he 
had peaceably departed, as one who was doubtless used to the 
formula.  He, at any rate, knew how to conduct himself!  Not so the 
others, the fellows who sat there doggedly on Mme Bron's battered 
straw-bottomed chairs under the great glazed lantern, where the heat 
was enough to roast you and there was an unpleasant odor.  What a 
lot of men it must have held!  Clarisse went upstairs again in 
disgust, crossed over behind scenes and nimbly mounted three flights 
of steps which led to the dressing rooms, in order to bring Simonne 
her reply.

Downstairs the prince had withdrawn from the rest and stood talking 
to Nana.  He never left her; he stood brooding over her through 
half-shut eyelids.  Nana did not look at him but, smiling, nodded 
yes.  Suddenly, however, Count Muffat obeyed an overmastering 
impulse, and leaving Bordenave, who was explaining to him the 
working of the rollers and windlasses, he came up in order to 
interrupt their confabulations.  Nana lifted her eyes and smiled at 
him as she smiled at His Highness.  But she kept her ears open 
notwithstanding, for she was waiting for her cue.

"The third act is the shortest, I believe," the prince began saying, 
for the count's presence embarrassed him.

She did not answer; her whole expression altered; she was suddenly 
intent on her business.  With a rapid movement of the shoulders she 
had let her furs slip from her, and Mme Jules, standing behind, had 
caught them in her arms.  And then after passing her two hands to 
her hair as though to make it fast, she went on the stage in all her 
nudity.

"Hush, hush!" whispered Bordenave.

The count and the prince had been taken by surprise.  There was 
profound silence, and then a deep sigh and the far-off murmur of a 
multitude became audible.  Every evening when Venus entered in her 
godlike nakedness the same effect was produced.  Then Muffat was 
seized with a desire to see; he put his eye to the peephole.  Above 
and beyond the glowing arc formed by the footlights the dark body of 
the house seemed full of ruddy vapor, and against this neutral-
tinted background, where row upon row of faces struck a pale, 
uncertain note, Nana stood forth white and vast, so that the boxes 
from the balcony to the flies were blotted from view.  He saw her 
from behind, noted her swelling hips, her outstretched arms, while 
down on the floor, on the same level as her feet, the prompter's 
head--an old man's head with a humble, honest face--stood on the 
edge of the stage, looking as though it had been severed from the 
body.  At certain points in her opening number an undulating 
movement seemed to run from her neck to her waist and to die out in 
the trailing border of her tunic.  When amid a tempest of applause 
she had sung her last note she bowed, and the gauze floated forth 
round about her limbs, and her hair swept over her waist as she bent 
sharply backward.  And seeing her thus, as with bending form and 
with exaggerated hips she came backing toward the count's peephole, 
he stood upright again, and his face was very white.  The stage had 
disappeared, and he now saw only the reverse side of the scenery 
with its display of old posters pasted up in every direction.  On 
the practicable slope, among the lines of gas jets, the whole of 
Olympus had rejoined the dozing Mme Drouard.  They were waiting for 
the close of the act.  Bosc and Fontan sat on the floor with their 
knees drawn up to their chins, and Prulliere stretched himself and 
yawned before going on.  Everybody was worn out; their eyes were 
red, and they were longing to go home to sleep.

Just then Fauchery, who had been prowling about on the O.P. side 
ever since Bordenave had forbidden him the other, came and 
buttonholed the count in order to keep himself in countenance and 
offered at the same time to show him the dressing rooms.  An 
increasing sense of languor had left Muffat without any power of 
resistance, and after looking round for the Marquis de Chouard, who 
had disappeared, he ended by following the journalist.  He 
experienced a mingled feeling of relief and anxiety as he left the 
wings whence he had been listening to Nana's songs.

Fauchery had already preceded him up the staircase, which was closed 
on the first and second floors by low-paneled doors.  It was one of 
those stairways which you find in miserable tenements.  Count Muffat 
had seen many such during his rounds as member of the Benevolent 
Organization.  It was bare and dilapidated: there was a wash of 
yellow paint on its walls; its steps had been worn by the incessant 
passage of feet, and its iron balustrade had grown smooth under the 
friction of many hands.  On a level with the floor on every 
stairhead there was a low window which resembled a deep, square 
venthole, while in lanterns fastened to the walls flaring gas jets 
crudely illuminatcd the surrounding squalor and gave out a glowing 
heat which, as it mounted up the narrow stairwell, grew ever more 
intense.

When he reached the foot of the stairs the count once more felt the 
hot breath upon his neck and shoulders.  As of old it was laden with 
the odor of women, wafted amid floods of light and sound from the 
dressing rooms above, and now with every upward step he took the 
musky scent of powders and the tart perfume of toilet vinegars 
heated and bewildered him more and more.  On the first floor two 
corridors ran backward, branching sharply off and presenting a set 
of doors to view which were painted yellow and numbered with great 
white numerals in such a way as to suggest a hotel with a bad 
reputation.  The tiles on the floor had been many of them unbedded, 
and the old house being in a state of subsidence, they stuck up like 
hummocks.  The count dashed recklessly forward, glanced through a 
half-open door and saw a very dirty room which resembled a barber's 
shop in a poor part of the town.  In was furnished with two chairs, 
a mirror and a small table containing a drawer which had been 
blackened by the grease from brushes and combs.  A great perspiring 
fellow with smoking shoulders was changing his linen there, while in 
a similar room next door a woman was drawing on her gloves 
preparatory to departure.  Her hair was damp and out of curl, as 
though she had just had a bath.  But Fauchery began calling the 
count, and the latter was rushing up without delay when a furious 
"damn!" burst from the corridor on the right.  Mathilde, a little 
drab of a miss, had just broken her washhand basin, the soapy water 
from which was flowing out to the stairhead.  A dressing room door 
banged noisily.  Two women in their stays skipped across the 
passage, and another, with the hem of her shift in her mouth, 
appeared and immediately vanished from view.  Then followed a sound 
of laughter, a dispute, the snatch of a song which was suddenly 
broken off short.  All along the passage naked gleams, sudden 
visions of white skin and wan underlinen were observable through 
chinks in doorways.  Two girls were making very merry, showing each 
other their birthmarks.  One of them, a very young girl, almost a 
child, had drawn her skirts up over her knees in order to sew up a 
rent in her drawers, and the dressers, catching sight of the two 
men, drew some curtains half to for decency's sake.  The wild 
stampede which follows the end of a play had already begun, the 
grand removal of white paint and rouge, the reassumption amid clouds 
of rice powder of ordinary attire.  The strange animal scent came in 
whiffs of redoubled intensity through the lines of banging doors.  
On the third story Muffat abandoned himself to the feeling of 
intoxication which was overpowering him.  For the chorus girls' 
dressing room was there, and you saw a crowd of twenty women and a 
wild display of soaps and flasks of lavender water.  The place 
resembled the common room in a slum lodging house.  As he passed by 
he heard fierce sounds of washing behind a closed door and a perfect 
storm raging in a washhand basin.  And as he was mounting up to the 
topmost story of all, curiosity led him to risk one more little peep 
through an open loophole.  The room was empty, and under the flare 
of the gas a solitary chamber pot stood forgotten among a heap of 
petticoats trailing on the floor.  This room afforded him his 
ultimate impression.  Upstairs on the fourth floor he was well-nigh 
suffocated.  All the scents, all the blasts of heat, had found their 
goal there.  The yellow ceiling looked as if it had been baked, and 
a lamp burned amid fumes of russet-colored fog.  For some seconds he 
leaned upon the iron balustrade which felt warm and damp and well-
nigh human to the touch.  And he shut his eyes and drew a long 
breath and drank in the sexual atmosphere of the place.  Hitherto he 
had been utterly ignorant of it, but now it beat full in his face.

"Do come here," shouted Fauchery, who had vanished some moments ago.  
"You're being asked for."

At the end of the corridor was the dressing room belonging to 
Clarisse and Simonne.  It was a long, ill-built room under the roof 
with a garret ceiling and sloping walls.  The light penetrated to it 
from two deep-set openings high up in the wall, but at that hour of 
the night the dressing room was lit by flaring gas.  It was papered 
with a paper at seven sous a roll with a pattern of roses twining 
over green trelliswork.  Two boards, placed near one another and 
covered with oilcloth, did duty for dressing tables.  They were 
black with spilled water, and underneath them was a fine medley of 
dinted zinc jugs, slop pails and coarse yellow earthenware crocks.  
There was an array of fancy articles in the room--a battered, soiled 
and well-worn array of chipped basins, of toothless combs, of all 
those manifold untidy trifles which, in their hurry and 
carelessness, two women will leave scattered about when they undress 
and wash together amid purely temporary surroundings, the dirty 
aspect of which has ceased to concern them.

"Do come here," Fauchery repeated with the good-humored familiarity 
which men adopt among their fallen sisters.  "Clarisse is wanting to 
kiss you."

Muffat entered the room at last.  But what was his surprise when he 
found the Marquis de Chouard snugly enscounced on a chair between 
the two dressing tables!  The marquis had withdrawn thither some 
time ago.  He was spreading his feet apart because a pail was 
leaking and letting a whitish flood spread over the floor.  He was 
visibly much at his ease, as became a man who knew all the snug 
corners, and had grown quite merry in the close dressing room, where 
people might have been bathing, and amid those quietly immodest 
feminine surroundings which the uncleanness of the little place 
rendered at once natural and poignant.

"D'you go with the old boy?" Simonne asked Clarisse in a whisper.

"Rather!" replied the latter aloud.

The dresser, a very ugly and extremely familiar young girl, who was 
helping Simonne into her coat, positively writhed with laughter.  
The three pushed each other and babbled little phrases which 
redoubled their merriment.

"Come, Clarisse, kiss the gentleman," said Fauchery.  "You know, 
he's got the rhino."

And turning to the count:

"You'll see, she's very nice!  She's going to kiss you!"

But Clarisse was disgusted by the men.  She spoke in violent terms 
of the dirty lot waiting at the porter's lodge down below.  Besides, 
she was in a hurry to go downstairs again; they were making her miss 
her last scene.  Then as Fauchery blocked up the doorway, she gave 
Muffat a couple of kisses on the whiskers, remarking as she did so:

"It's not for you, at any rate!  It's for that nuisance Fauchery!"

And with that she darted off, and the count remained much 
embarrassed in his father-in-law's presence.  The blood had rushed 
to his face.  In Nana's dressing room, amid all the luxury of 
hangings and mirrors, he had not experienced the sharp physical 
sensation which the shameful wretchedness of that sorry garret 
excited within him, redolent as it was of these two girls' self-
abandonment.  Meanwhile the marquis had hurried in the rear of 
Simonne, who was making off at the top of her pace, and he kept 
whispering in her ear while she shook her head in token of refusal.  
Fauchery followed them, laughing.  And with that the count found 
himself alone with the dresser, who was washing out the basins.  
Accordingly he took his departure, too, his legs almost failing 
under him.  Once more he put up flights of half-dressed women and 
caused doors to bang as he advanced.  But amid the disorderly, 
disbanded troops of girls to be found on each of the four stories, 
he was only distinctly aware of a cat, a great tortoise-shell cat, 
which went gliding upstairs through the ovenlike place where the air 
was poisoned with musk, rubbing its back against the banisters and 
keeping its tail exceedingly erect.

"Yes, to be sure!" said a woman hoarsely.  "I thought they'd keep us 
back tonight!  What a nuisance they are with their calls!"

The end had come; the curtain had just fallen.  There was a 
veritable stampede on the staircase--its walls rang with 
exclamations, and everyone was in a savage hurry to dress and be 
off.  As Count Muffat came down the last step or two he saw Nana and 
the prince passing slowly along the passage.  The young woman halted 
and lowered her voice as she said with a smile:

"All right then--by and by!"

The prince returned to the stage, where Bordenave was awaiting him.  
And left alone with Nana, Muffat gave way to an impulse of anger and 
desire.  He ran up behind her and, as she was on the point of 
entering her dressing room, imprinted a rough kiss on her neck among 
little golden hairs curling low down between her shoulders.  It was 
as though he had returned the kiss that had been given him upstairs.  
Nana was in a fury; she lifted her hand, but when she recognized the 
count she smiled.

"Oh, you frightened me," she said simply.

And her smile was adorable in its embarrassment and submissiveness, 
as though she had despaired of this kiss and were happy to have 
received it.  But she could do nothing for him either that evening 
or the day after.  It was a case of waiting.  Nay, even if it had 
been in her power she would still have let herself be desired.  Her 
glance said as much.  At length she continued:

"I'm a landowner, you know.  Yes, I'm buying a country house near 
Orleans, in a part of the world to which you sometimes betake 
yourself.  Baby told me you did--little Georges Hugon, I mean.  You 
know him?  So come and see me down there."

The count was a shy man, and the thought of his roughness had 
frightened him; he was ashamed of what he had done and he bowed 
ceremoniously, promising at the same time to take advantage of her 
invitation.  Then he walked off as one who dreams.

He was rejoining the prince when, passing in front of the foyer, he 
heard Satin screaming out:

"Oh, the dirty old thing!  Just you bloody well leave me alone!"

It was the Marquis de Chouard who was tumbling down over Satin.  The 
girl had decidedly had enough of the fashionable world!  Nana had 
certainly introduced her to Bordenave, but the necessity of standing 
with sealed lips for fear of allowing some awkward phrase to escape 
her had been too much for her feelings, and now she was anxious to 
regain her freedom, the more so as she had run against an old flame 
of hers in the wings.  This was the super, to whom the task of 
impersonating Pluto had been entrusted, a pastry cook, who had 
already treated her to a whole week of love and flagellation.  She 
was waiting for him, much irritated at the things the marquis was 
saying to her, as though she were one of those theatrical ladies!  
And so at last she assumed a highly respectable expression and 
jerked out this phrase:

"My husband's coming!  You'll see."

Meanwhile the worn-looking artistes were dropping off one after the 
other in their outdoor coats.  Groups of men and women were coming 
down the little winding staircase, and the outlines of battered hats 
and worn-out shawls were visible in the shadows.  They looked 
colorless and unlovely, as became poor play actors who have got rid 
of their paint.  On the stage, where the side lights and battens 
were being extinguished, the prince was listening to an anecdote 
Bordenave was telling him.  He was waiting for Nana, and when at 
length she made her appearance the stage was dark, and the fireman 
on duty was finishing his round, lantern in hand.  Bordenave, in 
order to save His Highness going about by the Passage des Panoramas, 
had made them open the corridor which led from the porter's lodge to 
the entrance hall of the theater.  Along this narrow alley little 
women were racing pell-mell, for they were delighted to escape from 
the men who were waiting for them in the other passage.  They went 
jostling and elbowing along, casting apprehensive glances behind 
them and only breathing freely when they got outside.  Fontan, Bosc 
and Prulliere, on the other hand, retired at a leisurely pace, 
joking at the figure cut by the serious, paying admirers who were 
striding up and down the Galerie des Varietes at a time when the 
little dears were escaping along the boulevard with the men of their 
hearts.  But Clarisse was especially sly.  She had her suspicions 
about La Faloise, and, as a matter of fact, he was still in his 
place in the lodge among the gentlemen obstinately waiting on Mme 
Bron's chairs.  They all stretched forward, and with that she passed 
brazenly by in the wake of a friend.  The gentlemen were blinking in 
bewilderment over the wild whirl of petticoats eddying at the foot 
of the narrow stairs.  It made them desperate to think they had 
waited so long, only to see them all flying away like this without 
being able to recognize a single one.  The litter of little black 
cats were sleeping on the oilcloth, nestled against their mother's 
belly, and the latter was stretching her paws out in a state of 
beatitude while the big tortoise-shell cat sat at the other end of 
the table, her tail stretched out behind her and her yellow eyes 
solemnly following the flight of the women.

"If His Highness will be good enough to come this way," said 
Bordenave at the bottom of the stairs, and he pointed to the 
passage.

Some chorus girls were still crowding along it.  The prince began 
following Nana while Muffat and the marquis walked behind.

It was a long, narrow passage lying between the theater and the 
house next door, a kind of contracted by-lane which had been covered 
with a sloping glass roof.  Damp oozed from the walls, and the 
footfall sounded as hollow on the tiled floor as in an underground 
vault.  It was crowded with the kind of rubbish usually found in a 
garret.  There was a workbench on which the porter was wont to plane 
such parts of the scenery as required it, besides a pile of wooden 
barriers which at night were placed at the doors of the theater for 
the purpose of regulating the incoming stream of people.  Nana had 
to pick up her dress as she passed a hydrant which, through having 
been carelessly turned off, was flooding the tiles underfoot.  In 
the entrance hall the company bowed and said good-by.  And when 
Bordenave was alone he summed up his opinion of the prince in a 
shrug of eminently philosophic disdain.

"He's a bit of a duffer all the same," he said to Fauchery without 
entering on further explanations, and with that Rose Mignon carried 
the journalist off with her husband in order to effect a 
reconciliation between them at home.

Muffat was left alone on the sidewalk.  His Highness had handed Nana 
quietly into his carriage, and the marquis had slipped off after 
Satin and her super.  In his excitement he was content to follow 
this vicious pair in vague hopes of some stray favor being granted 
him.  Then with brain on fire Muffat decided to walk home.  The 
struggle within him had wholly ceased.  The ideas and beliefs of the 
last forty years were being drowned in a flood of new life.  While 
he was passing along the boulevards the roll of the last carriages 
deafened him with the name of Nana; the gaslights set nude limbs 
dancing before his eyes--the nude limbs, the lithe arms, the white 
shoulders, of Nana.  And he felt that he was hers utterly: he would 
have abjured everything, sold everything, to possess her for a 
single hour that very night.  Youth, a lustful puberty of early 
manhood, was stirring within him at last, flaming up suddenly in the 
chaste heart of the Catholic and amid the dignified traditions of 
middle age.



CHAPTER VI


Count Muffat, accompanied by his wife and daughter, had arrived 
overnight at Les Fondettes, where Mme Hugon, who was staying there 
with only her son Georges, had invited them to come and spend a 
week.  The house, which had been built at the end of the eighteenth 
century, stood in the middle of a huge square enclosure.  It was 
perfectly unadorned, but the garden possessed magnificent shady 
trees and a chain of tanks fed by running spring water.  It stood at 
the side of the road which leads from Orleans to Paris and with its 
rich verdure and high-embowered trees broke the monotony of that 
flat countryside, where fields stretched to the horizon's verge.

At eleven o'clock, when the second lunch bell had called the whole 
household together, Mme Hugon, smiling in her kindly maternal way, 
gave Sabine two great kisses, one on each cheek, and said as she did 
so:

"You know it's my custom in the country.  Oh, seeing you here makes 
me feel twenty years younger.  Did you sleep well in your old room?"

Then without waiting for her reply she turned to Estelle:

"And this little one, has she had a nap too?  Give me a kiss, my 
child."

They had taken their seats in the vast dining room, the windows of 
which looked out on the park.  But they only occupied one end of the 
long table, where they sat somewhat crowded together for company's 
sake.  Sabine, in high good spirits, dwelt on various childish 
memories which had been stirred up within her--memories of months 
passed at Les Fondettes, of long walks, of a tumble into one of the 
tanks on a summer evening, of an old romance of chivalry discovered 
by her on the top of a cupboard and read during the winter before 
fires made of vine branches.  And Georges, who had not seen the 
countess for some months, thought there was something curious about 
her.  Her face seemed changed, somehow, while, on the other hand, 
that stick of an Estelle seemed more insignificant and dumb and 
awkward than ever.

While such simple fare as cutlets and boiled eggs was being 
discussed by the company, Mme Hugon, as became a good housekeeper, 
launched out into complaints.  The butchers, she said, were becoming 
impossible.  She bought everything at Orleans, and yet they never 
brought her the pieces she asked for.  Yet, alas, if her guests had 
nothing worth eating it was their own fault: they had come too late 
in the season.

"There's no sense in it," she said.  "I've been expecting you since 
June, and now we're half through September.  You see, it doesn't 
look pretty."

And with a movement she pointed to the trees on the grass outside, 
the leaves of which were beginning to turn yellow.  The day was 
covered, and the distance was hidden by a bluish haze which was 
fraught with a sweet and melancholy peacefulness.

"Oh, I'm expecting company," she continued.  "We shall be gayer 
then!  The first to come will be two gentlemen whom Georges has 
invited--Monsieur Fauchery and Monsieur Daguenet; you know them, do 
you not?  Then we shall have Monsieur de Vandeuvres, who has 
promised me a visit these five years past.  This time, perhaps, 
he'll make up his mind!"

"Oh, well and good!" said the countess, laughing.  "If we only can 
get Monsieur de Vandeuvres!  But he's too much engaged."

"And Philippe?" queried Muffat.

"Philippe has asked for a furlough," replied the old lady, "but 
without doubt you won't be at Les Fondettes any longer when he 
arrives."

The coffee was served.  Paris was now the subject of conversation, 
and Steiner's name was mentioned, at which Mme Hugon gave a little 
cry.

"Let me see," she said; "Monsieur Steiner is that stout man I met at 
your house one evening.  He's a banker, is he not?  Now there's a 
detestable man for you!  Why, he's gone and bought an actress an 
estate about a league from here, over Gumieres way, beyond the 
Choue.  The whole countryside's scandalized.  Did you know about 
that, my friend?"

"I knew nothing about it," replied Muffat.  "Ah, then, Steiner's 
bought a country place in the neighborhood!"

Hearing his mother broach the subject, Georges looked into his 
coffee cup, but in his astonishment at the count's answer he glanced 
up at him and stared.  Why was he lying so glibly?  The count, on 
his side, noticed the young fellow's movement and gave him a 
suspicious glance.  Mme Hugon continued to go into details: the 
country place was called La Mignotte.  In order to get there one had 
to go up the bank of the Choue as far as Gumieres in order to cross 
the bridge; otherwise one got one's feet wet and ran the risk of a 
ducking.

"And what is the actress's name?" asked the countess.

"Oh, I wasn't told," murmured the old lady.  "Georges, you were 
there the morning the gardener spoke to us about it."

Georges appeared to rack his brains.  Muffat waited, twirling a 
teaspoon between his fingers.  Then the countess addressed her 
husband:

"Isn't Monsieur Steiner with that singer at the Varietes, that 
Nana?"

"Nana, that's the name!  A horrible woman!" cried Mme Hugon with 
growing annoyance.  "And they are expecting her at La Mignotte.  
I've heard all about it from the gardener.  Didn't the gardener say 
they were expecting her this evening, Georges?"

The count gave a little start of astonishment, but Georges replied 
with much vivacity:

"Oh, Mother, the gardener spoke without knowing anything about it.  
Directly afterward the coachman said just the opposite.  Nobody's 
expected at La Mignotte before the day after tomorrow."

He tried hard to assume a natural expression while he slyly watched 
the effect of his remarks on the count.  The latter was twirling his 
spoon again as though reassured.  The countess, her eyes fixed 
dreamily on the blue distances of the park, seemed to have lost all 
interest in the conversation.  The shadow of a smile on her lips, 
she seemed to be following up a secret thought which had been 
suddenly awakened within her.  Estelle, on the other hand, sitting 
stiffly on her chair, had heard all that had been said about Nana, 
but her white, virginal face had not betrayed a trace of emotion.

"Dear me, dear me!  I've got no right to grow angry," murmured Mme 
Hugon after a pause, and with a return to her old good humor she 
added:

"Everybody's got a right to live.  If we meet this said lady on the 
road we shall not bow to her--that's all!"

And as they got up from table she once more gently upbraided the 
Countess Sabine for having been so long in coming to her that year.  
But the countess defended herself and threw the blame of the delays 
upon her husband's shoulders.  Twice on the eve of departure, when 
all the trunks were locked, he counterordered their journey on the 
plea of urgent business.  Then he had suddenly decided to start just 
when the trip seemed shelved.  Thereupon the old lady told them how 
Georges in the same way had twice announced his arrival without 
arriving and had finally cropped up at Les Fondettes the day before 
yesterday, when she was no longer expecting him.  They had come down 
into the garden, and the two men, walking beside the ladies, were 
listening to them in consequential silence.

"Never mind," said Mme Hugon, kissing her son's sunny locks, "Zizi 
is a very good boy to come and bury himself in the country with his 
mother.  He's a dear Zizi not to forget me!"

In the afternoon she expressed some anxiety, for Georges, directly 
after leaving the table, had complained of a heavy feeling in his 
head and now seemed in for an atrocious sick headache.  Toward four 
o'clock he said he would go upstairs to bed: it was the only remedy.  
After sleeping till tomorrow morning he would be perfectly himself 
again.  His mother was bent on putting him to bed herself, but as 
she left the room he ran and locked the door, explaining that he was 
shutting himself in so that no one should come and disturb him.  
Then caressingly he shouted, "Good night till tomorrow, little 
Mother!" and promised to take a nap.  But he did not go to bed again 
and with flushed cheeks and bright eyes noiselessly put on his 
clothes.  Then he sat on a chair and waited.  When the dinner bell 
rang he listened for Count Muffat, who was on his way to the dining 
room, and ten minutes later, when he was certain that no one would 
see him, he slipped from the window to the ground with the 
assistance of a rain pipe.  His bedroom was situated on the first 
floor and looked out upon the rear of the house.  He threw himself 
among some bushes and got out of the park and then galloped across 
the fields with empty stomach and heart beating with excitement.  
Night was closing in, and a small fine rain was beginning to fall.

It was the very evening that Nana was due at La Mignotte.  Ever 
since in the preceding May Steiner had bought her this country place 
she had from time to time been so filled with the desire of taking 
possession that she had wept hot tears about, but on each of these 
occasions Bordenave had refused to give her even the shortest leave 
and had deferred her holiday till September on the plea that he did 
not intend putting an understudy in her place, even for one evening, 
now that the exhibition was on.  Toward the close of August he spoke 
of October.  Nana was furious and declared that she would be at La 
Mignotte in the middle of September.  Nay, in order to dare 
Bordenave, she even invited a crowd of guests in his very presence.  
One afternoon in her rooms, as Muffat, whose advances she still 
adroitly resisted, was beseeching her with tremulous emotion to 
yield to his entreaties, she at length promised to be kind, but not 
in Paris, and to him, too, she named the middle of September.  Then 
on the twelfth she was seized by a desire to be off forthwith with 
Zoe as her sole companion.  It might be that Bordenave had got wind 
of her intentions and was about to discover some means of detaining 
her.  She was delighted at the notion of putting him in a fix, and 
she sent him a doctor's certificate.  When once the idea had entered 
her head of being the first to get to La Mignotte and of living 
there two days without anybody knowing anything about it, she rushed 
Zoe through the operation of packing and finally pushed her into a 
cab, where in a sudden burst of extreme contrition she kissed her 
and begged her pardon.  It was only when they got to the station 
refreshment room that she thought of writing Steiner of her 
movements.  She begged him to wait till the day after tomorrow 
before rejoining her if he wanted to find her quite bright and 
fresh.  And then, suddenly conceiving another project, she wrote a 
second letter, in which she besought her aunt to bring little Louis 
to her at once.  It would do Baby so much good!  And how happy they 
would be together in the shade of the trees!  In the railway 
carriage between Paris and Orleans she spoke of nothing else; her 
eyes were full of tears; she had an unexpected attack of maternal 
tenderness and mingled together flowers, birds and child in her 
every sentence.

La Mignotte was more than three leagues away from the station, and 
Nana lost a good hour over the hire of a carriage, a huge, 
dilapidated calash, which rumbled slowly along to an accompaniment 
of rattling old iron.  She had at once taken possession of the 
coachman, a little taciturn old man whom she overwhelmed with 
questions.  Had he often passed by La Mignotte?  It was behind this 
hill then?  There ought to be lots of trees there, eh?  And the 
house could one see it at a distance?  The little old man answered 
with a succession of grunts.  Down in the calash Nana was almost 
dancing with impatience, while Zoe, in her annoyance at having left 
Paris in such a hurry, sat stiffly sulking beside her.  The horse 
suddenly stopped short, and the young woman thought they had reached 
their destination.  She put her head out of the carriage door and 
asked:

"Are we there, eh?"

By way of answer the driver whipped up his horse, which was in the 
act of painfully climbing a hill.  Nana gazed ecstatically at the 
vast plain beneath the gray sky where great clouds were banked up.

"Oh, do look, Zoe!  There's greenery!  Now, is that all wheat?  Good 
lord, how pretty it is!"

"One can quite see that Madame doesn't come from the country," was 
the servant's prim and tardy rejoinder.  "As for me, I knew the 
country only too well when I was with my dentist.  He had a house at 
Bougival.  No, it's cold, too, this evening.  It's damp in these 
parts."

They were driving under the shadow of a wood, and Nana sniffed up 
the scent of the leaves as a young dog might.  All of a sudden at a 
turn of the road she caught sight of the corner of a house among the 
trees.  Perhaps it was there!  And with that she began a 
conversation with the driver, who continued shaking his head by way 
of saying no.  Then as they drove down the other side of the hill he 
contented himself by holding out his whip and muttering, "'Tis down 
there."

She got up and stretched herself almost bodily out of the carriage 
door.

"Where is it?  Where is it?" she cried with pale cheeks, but as yet 
she saw nothing.

At last she caught sight of a bit of wall.  And then followed a 
succession of little cries and jumps, the ecstatic behavior of a 
woman overcome by a new and vivid sensation.

"I see it!  I see it, Zoe!  Look out at the other side.  Oh, there's 
a terrace with brick ornaments on the roof!  And there's a hothouse 
down there!  But the place is immense.  Oh, how happy I am!  Do 
look, Zoe!  Now, do look!"

The carriage had by this time pulled up before the park gates.  A 
side door was opened, and the gardener, a tall, dry fellow, made his 
appearance, cap in hand.  Nana made an effort to regain her dignity, 
for the driver seemed now to be suppressing a laugh behind his dry, 
speechless lips.  She refrained from setting off at a run and 
listened to the gardener, who was a very talkative fellow.  He 
begged Madame to excuse the disorder in which she found everything, 
seeing that he had only received Madame's letter that very morning.  
But despite all his efforts, she flew off at a tangent and walked so 
quickly that Zoe could scarcely follow her.  At the end of the 
avenue she paused for a moment in order to take the house in at a 
glance.  It was a great pavilionlike building in the Italian manner, 
and it was flanked by a smaller construction, which a rich 
Englishman, after two years' residence in Naples, had caused to be 
erected and had forthwith become disgusted with.

"I'll take Madame over the house," said the gardener.

But she had outrun him entirely, and she shouted back that he was 
not to put himself out and that she would go over the house by 
herself.  She preferred doing that, she said.  And without removing 
her hat she dashed into the different rooms, calling to Zoe as she 
did so, shouting her impressions from one end of each corridor to 
the other and filling the empty house, which for long months had 
been uninhabited, with exclamations and bursts of laughter.  In the 
first place, there was the hall.  It was a little damp, but that 
didn't matter; one wasn't going to sleep in it.  Then came the 
drawing room, quite the thing, the drawing room, with its windows 
opening on the lawn.  Only the red upholsteries there were hideous; 
she would alter all that.  As to the dining room-well, it was a 
lovely dining room, eh?  What big blowouts you might give in Paris 
if you had a dining room as large as that!  As she was going 
upstairs to the first floor it occurred to her that she had not seen 
the kitchen, and she went down again and indulged in ecstatic 
exclamations.  Zoe ought to admire the beautiful dimensions of the 
sink and the width of the hearth, where you might have roasted a 
sheep!  When she had gone upstairs again her bedroom especially 
enchanted her.  It had been hung with delicate rose-colored Louis 
XVI cretonne by an Orleans upholsterer.  Dear me, yes!  One ought to 
sleep jolly sound in such a room as that; why, it was a real best 
bedroom!  Then came four or five guest chambers and then some 
splendid garrets, which would be extremely convenient for trunks and 
boxes.  Zoe looked very gruff and cast a frigid glance into each of 
the rooms as she lingered in Madame's wake.  She saw Nana 
disappearing up the steep garret ladder and said, "Thanks, I haven't 
the least wish to break my legs."  But the sound of a voice reached 
her from far away; indeed, it seemed to come whistling down a 
chimney.

"Zoe, Zoe, where are you?  Come up, do!  You've no idea!  It's like 
fairyland!"

Zoe went up, grumbling.  On the roof she found her mistress leaning 
against the brickwork balustrade and gazing at the valley which 
spread out into the silence.  The horizon was immeasurably wide, but 
it was now covered by masses of gray vapor, and a fierce wind was 
driving fine rain before it.  Nana had to hold her hat on with both 
hands to keep it from being blown away while her petticoats streamed 
out behind her, flapping like a flag.

"Not if I know it!" said Zoe, drawing her head in at once.  "Madame 
will be blown away.  What beastly weather!"

Madame did not hear what she said.  With her head over the 
balustrade she was gazing at the grounds beneath.  They consisted of 
seven or eight acres of land enclosed within a wall.  Then the view 
of the kitchen garden entirely engrossed her attention.  She darted 
back, jostling the lady's maid at the top of the stairs and bursting 
out:

"It's full of cabbages!  Oh, such woppers!  And lettuces and sorrel 
and onions and everything!  Come along, make haste!"

The rain was falling more heavily now, and she opened her white silk 
sunshade and ran down the garden walks. 

"Madame will catch cold," cried Zoe, who had stayed quietly behind 
under the awning over the garden door.

But Madame wanted to see things, and at each new discovery there was 
a burst of wonderment.

"Zoe, here's spinach!  Do come.  Oh, look at the artichokes!  They 
are funny.  So they grow in the ground, do they?  Now, what can that 
be?  I don't know it.  Do come, Zoe, perhaps you know."

The lady's maid never budged an inch.  Madame must really be raving 
mad.  For now the rain was coming down in torrents, and the little 
white silk sunshade was already dark with it.  Nor did it shelter 
Madame, whose skirts were wringing wet.  But that didn't put her out 
in the smallest degree, and in the pouring rain she visited the 
kitchen garden and the orchard, stopping in front of every fruit 
tree and bending over every bed of vegetables.  Then she ran and 
looked down the well and lifted up a frame to see what was 
underneath it and was lost in the contemplation of a huge pumpkin.  
She wanted to go along every single garden walk and to take 
immediate possession of all the things she had been wont to dream of 
in the old days, when she was a slipshod work-girl on the Paris 
pavements.  The rain redoubled, but she never heeded it and was only 
miserable at the thought that the daylight was fading.  She could 
not see clearly now and touched things with her fingers to find out 
what they were.  Suddenly in the twilight she caught sight of a bed 
of strawberries, and all that was childish in her awoke.

"Strawberries!  Strawberries!  There are some here; I can feel them.  
A plate, Zoe!  Come and pick strawberries."

And dropping her sunshade, Nana crouched down in the mire under the 
full force of the downpour.  With drenched hands she began gathering 
the fruit among the leaves.  But Zoe in the meantime brought no 
plate, and when the young woman rose to her feet again she was 
frightened.  She thought she had seen a shadow close to her.

"It's some beast!" she screamed.

But she stood rooted to the path in utter amazement.  It was a man, 
and she recognized him.

"Gracious me, it's Baby!  What ARE you doing there, baby?"

"'Gad, I've come--that's all!" replied Georges.

Her head swam.

"You knew I'd come through the gardener telling you?  Oh, that poor 
child!  Why, he's soaking!"

"Oh, I'll explain that to you!  The rain caught me on my way here, 
and then, as I didn't wish to go upstream as far as Gumieres, I 
crossed the Choue and fell into a blessed hole."

Nana forgot the strawberries forthwith.  She was trembling and full 
of pity.  That poor dear Zizi in a hole full of water!  And she drew 
him with her in the direction of the house and spoke of making up a 
roaring fire.

"You know," he murmured, stopping her among the shadows, "I was in 
hiding because I was afraid of being scolded, like in Paris, when I 
come and see you and you're not expecting me."

She made no reply but burst out laughing and gave him a kiss on the 
forehead.  Up till today she had always treated him like a naughty 
urchin, never taking his declarations seriously and amusing herself 
at his expense as though he were a little man of no consequence 
whatever.  There was much ado to install him in the house.  She 
absolutely insisted on the fire being lit in her bedroom, as being 
the most comfortable place for his reception.  Georges had not 
surprised Zoe, who was used to all kinds of encounters, but the 
gardener, who brought the wood upstairs, was greatly nonplused at 
sight of this dripping gentleman to whom he was certain he had not 
opened the front door.  He was, however, dismissed, as he was no 
longer wanted.

A lamp lit up the room, and the fire burned with a great bright 
flame.

"He'll never get dry, and he'll catch cold," said Nana, seeing 
Georges beginning to shiver.

And there were no men's trousers in her house!  She was on the point 
of calling the gardener back when an idea struck her.  Zoe, who was 
unpacking the trunks in the dressing room, brought her mistress a 
change of underwear, consisting of a shift and some petticoats with 
a dressing jacket.

"Oh, that's first rate!" cried the young woman.  "Zizi can put 'em 
all on.  You're not angry with me, eh?  When your clothes are dry 
you can put them on again, and then off with you, as fast as fast 
can be, so as not to have a scolding from your mamma.  Make haste!  
I'm going to change my things, too, in the dressing room."

Ten minutes afterward, when she reappeared in a tea gown, she 
clasped her hands in a perfect ecstasy.

"Oh, the darling!  How sweet he looks dressed like a little woman!"

He had simply slipped on a long nightgown with an insertion front, a 
pair of worked drawers and the dressing jacket, which was a long 
cambric garment trimmed with lace.  Thus attired and with his 
delicate young arms showing and his bright damp hair falling almost 
to his shoulders, he looked just like a girl.

"Why, he's as slim as I am!" said Nana, putting her arm round his 
waist.  "Zoe, just come here and see how it suits him.  It's made 
for him, eh?  All except the bodice part, which is too large.  He 
hasn't got as much as I have, poor, dear Zizi!"

"Oh, to be sure, I'm a bit wanting there," murmured Georges with a 
smile.

All three grew very merry about it.  Nana had set to work buttoning 
the dressing jacket from top to bottom so as to make him quite 
decent.  Then she turned him round as though he were a doll, gave 
him little thumps, made the skirt stand well out behind.  After 
which she asked him questions.  Was he comfortable?  Did he feel 
warm?  Zounds, yes, he was comfortable!  Nothing fitted more closely 
and warmly than a woman's shift; had he been able, he would always 
have worn one.  He moved round and about therein, delighted with the 
fine linen and the soft touch of that unmanly garment, in the folds 
of which he thought he discovered some of Nana's own warm life.

Meanwhile Zoe had taken the soaked clothes down to the kitchen in 
order to dry them as quickly as possible in front of a vine-branch 
fire.  Then Georges, as he lounged in an easy chair, ventured to 
make a confession.

"I say, are you going to feed this evening?  I'm dying of hunger.  I 
haven't dined."

Nana was vexed.  The great silly thing to go sloping off from 
Mamma's with an empty stomach, just to chuck himself into a hole 
full of water!  But she was as hungry as a hunter too.  They 
certainly must feed!  Only they would have to eat what they could 
get.  Whereupon a round table was rolled up in front of the fire, 
and the queerest of dinners was improvised thereon.  Zoe ran down to 
the gardener's, he having cooked a mess of cabbage soup in case 
Madame should not dine at Orleans before her arrival.  Madame, 
indeed, had forgotten to tell him what he was to get ready in the 
letter she had sent him.  Fortunately the cellar was well furnished.  
Accordingly they had cabbage soup, followed by a piece of bacon.  
Then Nana rummaged in her handbag and found quite a heap of 
provisions which she had taken the precaution of stuffing into it.  
There was a Strasbourg pate, for instance, and a bag of sweet-meats 
and some oranges.  So they both ate away like ogres and, while they 
satisfied their healthy young appetites, treated one another with 
easy good fellowship.  Nana kept calling Georges "dear old girl," a 
form of address which struck her as at once tender and familiar.  At 
dessert, in order not to give Zoe any more trouble, they used the 
same spoon turn and turn about while demolishing a pot of preserves 
they had discovered at the top of a cupboard.

"Oh, you dear old girl!" said Nana, pushing back the round table.  
"I haven't made such a good dinner these ten years past!"

Yet it was growing late, and she wanted to send her boy off for fear 
he should be suspected of all sorts of things.  But he kept 
declaring that he had plenty of time to spare.  For the matter of 
that, his clothes were not drying well, and Zoe averred that it 
would take an hour longer at least, and as she was dropping with 
sleep after the fatigues of the journey, they sent her off to bed.  
After which they were alone in the silent house.

It was a very charming evening.  The fire was dying out amid glowing 
embers, and in the great blue room, where Zoe had made up the bed 
before going upstairs, the air felt a little oppressive.  Nana, 
overcome by the heavy warmth, got up to open the window for a few 
minutes, and as she did so she uttered a little cry.

"Great heavens, how beautiful it is!  Look, dear old girl!"

Georges had come up, and as though the window bar had not been 
sufficiently wide, he put his arm round Nana's waist and rested his 
head against her shoulder.  The weather had undergone a brisk 
change: the skies were clearing, and a full moon lit up the country 
with its golden disk of light.  A sovereign quiet reigned over the 
valley.  It seemed wider and larger as it opened on the immense 
distances of the plain, where the trees loomed like little shadowy 
islands amid a shining and waveless lake.  And Nana grew 
tenderhearted, felt herself a child again.  Most surely she had 
dreamed of nights like this at an epoch which she could not recall.  
Since leaving the train every object of sensation--the wide 
countryside, the green things with their pungent scents, the house, 
the vegetables--had stirred her to such a degree that now it seemed 
to her as if she had left Paris twenty years ago.  Yesterday's 
existence was far, far away, and she was full of sensations of which 
she had no previous experience.  Georges, meanwhile, was giving her 
neck little coaxing kisses, and this again added to her sweet 
unrest.  With hesitating hand she pushed him from her, as though he 
were a child whose affectionate advances were fatiguing, and once 
more she told him that he ought to take his departure.  He did not 
gainsay her.  All in good time--he would go all in good time!

But a bird raised its song and again was silent.  It was a robin in 
an elder tree below the window.

"Wait one moment," whispered Georges; "the lamp's frightening him.  
I'll put it out."

And when he came back and took her waist again he added:

"We'll relight it in a minute."

Then as she listened to the robin and the boy pressed against her 
side, Nana remembered.  Ah yes, it was in novels that she had got to 
know all this!  In other days she would have given her heart to have 
a full moon and robins and a lad dying of love for her.  Great God, 
she could have cried, so good and charming did it all seem to her!  
Beyond a doubt she had been born to live honestly!  So she pushed 
Georges away again, and he grew yet bolder.

"No, let me be.  I don't care about it.  It would be very wicked at 
your age.  Now listen--I'll always be your mamma."

A sudden feeling of shame overcame her.  She was blushing 
exceedingly, and yet not a soul could see her.  The room behind them 
was full of black night while the country stretched before them in 
silence and lifeless solitude.  Never had she known such a sense of 
shame before.  Little by little she felt her power of resistance 
ebbing away, and that despite her embarrassed efforts to the 
contrary.  That disguise of his, that woman's shift and that 
dressing jacket set her laughing again.  It was as though a girl 
friend were teasing her.

"Oh, it's not right; it's not right!" she stammered after a last 
effort.

And with that, in face of the lovely night, she sank like a young 
virgin into the arms of this mere child.  The house slept.

Next morning at Les Fondettes, when the bell rang for lunch, the 
dining-room table was no longer too big for the company.  Fauchery 
and Daguenet had been driven up together in one carriage, and after 
them another had arrived with the Count de Vandeuvres, who had 
followed by the next train.  Georges was the last to come 
downstairs.  He was looking a little pale, and his eyes were sunken, 
but in answer to questions he said that he was much better, though 
he was still somewhat shaken by the violence of the attack.  Mme 
Hugon looked into his eyes with an anxious smile and adjusted his 
hair which had been carelessly combed that morning, but he drew back 
as though embarrassed by this tender little action.  During the meal 
she chaffed Vandeuvres very pleasantly and declared that she had 
expected him for five years past.

"Well, here you are at last!  How have you managed it?"

Vandeuvres took her remarks with equal pleasantry.  He told her that 
he had lost a fabulous sum of money at the club yesterday and 
thereupon had come away with the intention of ending up in the 
country.

"'Pon my word, yes, if only you can find me an heiress in these 
rustic parts!  There must be delightful women hereabouts."

The old lady rendered equal thanks to Daguenet and Fauchery for 
having been so good as to accept her son's invitation, and then to 
her great and joyful surprise she saw the Marquis de Chouard enter 
the room.  A third carriage had brought him.

"Dear me, you've made this your trysting place today!" she cried.  
"You've passed word round!  But what's happening?  For years I've 
never succeeded in bringing you all together, and now you all drop 
in at once.  Oh, I certainly don't complain."

Another place was laid.  Fauchery found himself next the Countess 
Sabine, whose liveliness and gaiety surprised him when he remembered 
her drooping, languid state in the austere Rue Miromesnil drawing 
room.  Daguenet, on the other hand, who was seated on Estelle's 
left, seemed slightly put out by his propinquity to that tall, 
silent girl.  The angularity of her elbows was disagreeable to him.  
Muffat and Chouard had exchanged a sly glance while Vandeuvres 
continued joking about his coming marriage.

"Talking of ladies," Mme Hugon ended by saying, "I have a new 
neighbor whom you probably know."

And she mentioned Nana.  Vandeuvres affected the liveliest 
astonishment.

"Well, that is strange!  Nana's property near here!"

Fauchery and Daguenet indulged in a similar demonstration while the 
Marquis de Chouard discussed the breast of a chicken without 
appearing to comprehend their meaning.  Not one of the men had 
smiled.

"Certainly," continued the old lady, "and the person in question 
arrived at La Mignotte yesterday evening, as I was saying she would.  
I got my information from the gardener this morning."

At these words the gentlemen could not conceal their very real 
surprise.  They all looked up.  Eh?  What?  Nana had come down!  But 
they were only expecting her next day; they were privately under the 
impression that they would arrive before her!  Georges alone sat 
looking at his glass with drooped eyelids and a tired expression.  
Ever since the beginning of lunch he had seemed to be sleeping with 
open eyes and a vague smile on his lips.

"Are you still in pain, my Zizi?" asked his mother, who had been 
gazing at him throughout the meal.

He started and blushed as he said that he was very well now, but the 
worn-out insatiate expression of a girl who has danced too much did 
not fade from his face.

"What's the matter with your neck?" resumed Mme Hugon in an alarmed 
tone.  "It's all red."

He was embarrassed and stammered.  He did not know--he had nothing 
the matter with his neck.  Then drawing his shirt collar up:

"Ah yes, some insect stung me there!"

The Marquis de Chouard had cast a sidelong glance at the little red 
place.  Muffat, too, looked at Georges.  The company was finishing 
lunch and planning various excursions.  Fauchery was growing 
increasingly excited with the Countess Sabine's laughter.  As he was 
passing her a dish of fruit their hands touched, and for one second 
she looked at him with eyes so full of dark meaning that he once 
more thought of the secret which had been communicated to him one 
evening after an uproarious dinner.  Then, too, she was no longer 
the same woman.  Something was more pronounced than of old, and her 
gray foulard gown which fitted loosely over her shoulders added a 
touch of license to her delicate, high-strung elegance.

When they rose from the table Daguenet remained behind with Fauchery 
in order to impart to him the following crude witticism about 
Estelle: "A nice broomstick that to shove into a man's hands!"  
Nevertheless, he grew serious when the journalist told him the 
amount she was worth in the way of dowry.

"Four hundred thousand francs."

"And the mother?" queried Fauchery.  "She's all right, eh?"

"Oh, SHE'LL work the oracle!  But it's no go, my dear man!"

"Bah!  How are we to know?  We must wait and see."

It was impossible to go out that day, for the rain was still falling 
in heavy showers.  Georges had made haste to disappear from the 
scene and had double-locked his door.  These gentlemen avoided 
mutual explanations, though they were none of them deceived as to 
the reasons which had brought them together.  Vandeuvres, who had 
had a very bad time at play, had really conceived the notion of 
lying fallow for a season, and he was counting on Nana's presence in 
the neighborhood as a safeguard against excessive boredom.  Fauchery 
had taken advantage of the holidays granted him by Rose, who just 
then was extremely busy.  He was thinking of discussing a second 
notice with Nana, in case country air should render them 
reciprocally affectionate.  Daguenet, who had been just a little 
sulky with her since Steiner had come upon the scene, was dreaming 
of resuming the old connection or at least of snatching some 
delightful opportunities if occasion offered.  As to the Marquis de 
Chouard, he was watching for times and seasons.  But among all those 
men who were busy following in the tracks of Venus--a Venus with the 
rouge scarce washed from her cheeks--Muffat was at once the most 
ardent and the most tortured by the novel sensations of desire and 
fear and anger warring in his anguished members.  A formal promise 
had been made him; Nana was awaiting him.  Why then had she taken 
her departure two days sooner than was expected?

He resolved to betake himself to La Mignotte after dinner that same 
evening.  At night as the count was leaving the park Georges fled 
forth after him.  He left him to follow the road to Gumieres, 
crossed the Choue, rushed into Nana's presence, breathless, furious 
and with tears in his eyes.  Ah yes, he understood everything!  That 
old fellow now on his way to her was coming to keep an appointment!  
Nana was dumfounded by this ebullition of jealousy, and, greatly 
moved by the way things were turning out, she took him in her arms 
and comforted him to the best of her ability.  Oh no, he was quite 
beside the mark; she was expecting no one.  If the gentleman came it 
would not be her fault.  What a great ninny that Zizi was to be 
taking on so about nothing at all!  By her child's soul she swore 
she loved nobody except her own Georges.  And with that she kissed 
him and wiped away his tears.

"Now just listen!  You'll see that it's all for your sake," she went 
on when he had grown somewhat calmer.  "Steiner has arrived--he's up 
above there now.  You know, duckie, I can't turn HIM out of doors."

"Yes, I know; I'm not talking of HIM," whispered the boy.

"Very well then, I've stuck him into the room at the end.  I said I 
was out of sorts.  He's unpacking his trunk.  Since nobody's seen 
you, be quick and run up and hide in my room and wait for me.

Georges sprang at her and threw his arms round her neck.  It was 
true after all!  She loved him a little!  So they would put the lamp 
out as they did yesterday and be in the dark till daytime!  Then as 
the front-door bell sounded he quietly slipped away.  Upstairs in 
the bedroom he at once took off his shoes so as not to make any 
noise and straightway crouched down behind a curtain and waited 
soberly.

Nana welcomed Count Muffat, who, though still shaken with passion, 
was now somewhat embarrassed.  She had pledged her word to him and 
would even have liked to keep it since he struck her as a serious, 
practicable lover.  But truly, who could have foreseen all that 
happened yesterday?  There was the voyage and the house she had 
never set eyes on before and the arrival of the drenched little 
lover!  How sweet it had all seemed to her, and how delightful it 
would be to continue in it!  So much the worse for the gentleman!  
For three months past she had been keeping him dangling after her 
while she affected conventionality in order the further to inflame 
him.  Well, well!  He would have to continue dangling, and if he 
didn't like that he could go!  She would sooner have thrown up 
everything than have played false to Georges.

The count had seated himself with all the ceremonious politeness 
becoming a country caller.  Only his hands were trembling slightly.  
Lust, which Nana's skillful tactics daily exasperated, had at last 
wrought terrible havoc in that sanguine, uncontaminated nature.  The 
grave man, the chamberlain who was wont to tread the state 
apartments at the Tuileries with slow and dignified step, was now 
nightly driven to plunge his teeth into his bolster, while with sobs 
of exasperation he pictured to himself a sensual shape which never 
changed.  But this time he was determined to make an end of the 
torture.  Coming along the highroad in the deep quiet of the 
gloaming, he had meditated a fierce course of action.  And the 
moment he had finished his opening remarks he tried to take hold of 
Nana with both hands.

"No, no!  Take care!" she said simply.  She was not vexed; nay, she 
even smiled.

He caught her again, clenching his teeth as he did so.  Then as she 
struggled to get free he coarsely and crudely reminded her that he 
had come to stay the night.  Though much embarrassed at this, Nana 
did not cease to smile.  She took his hands and spoke very 
familiarly in order to soften her refusal.

"Come now, darling, do be quiet!  Honor bright, I can't: Steiner's 
upstairs."

But he was beside himself.  Never yet had she seen a man in such a 
state.  She grew frightened and put her hand over his mouth in order 
to stifle his cries.  Then in lowered tones she besought him to be 
quiet and to let her alone.  Steiner was coming downstairs.  Things 
were getting stupid, to be sure!  When Steiner entered the room he 
heard Nana remarking:

"I adore the country."

She was lounging comfortably back in her deep easy chair, and she 
turned round and interrupted herself.

"It's Monsieur le Comte Muffat, darling.  He saw a light here while 
he was strolling past, and he came in to bid us welcome."

The two men clasped hands.  Muffat, with his face in shadow, stood 
silent for a moment or two.  Steiner seemed sulky.  Then they 
chatted about Paris: business there was at a standstill; abominable 
things had been happening on 'change.  When a quarter of an hour had 
elapsed Muffat took his departure, and, as the young woman was 
seeing him to the door, he tried without success to make an 
assignation for the following night.  Steiner went up to bed almost 
directly afterward, grumbling, as he did so, at the everlasting 
little ailments that seemed to afflict the genus courtesan.  The two 
old boys had been packed off at last!  When she was able to rejoin 
him Nana found Georges still hiding exemplarily behind the curtain.  
The room was dark.  He pulled her down onto the floor as she sat 
near him, and together they began playfully rolling on the ground, 
stopping now and again and smothering their laughter with kisses 
whenever they struck their bare feet against some piece of 
furniture.  Far away, on the road to Gumieres, Count Muffat walked 
slowly home and, hat in hand, bathed his burning forehead in the 
freshness and silence of the night.

During the days that followed Nana found life adorable.  In the 
lad's arms she was once more a girl of fifteen, and under the 
caressing influence of this renewed childhood love's white flower 
once more blossomed forth in a nature which had grown hackneyed and 
disgusted in the service of the other sex.  She would experience 
sudden fits of shame, sudden vivid emotions, which left her 
trembling.  She wanted to laugh and to cry, and she was beset by 
nervous, maidenly feelings, mingled with warm desires that made her 
blush again.  Never yet had she felt anything comparable to this.  
The country filled her with tender thoughts.  As a little girl she 
had long wished to dwell in a meadow, tending a goat, because one 
day on the talus of the fortifications she had seen a goat bleating 
at the end of its tether.  Now this estate, this stretch of land 
belonging to her, simply swelled her heart to bursting, so utterly 
had her old ambition been surpassed.  Once again she tasted the 
novel sensations experienced by chits of girls, and at night when 
she went upstairs, dizzy with her day in the open air and 
intoxicated by the scent of green leaves, and rejoined her Zizi 
behind the curtain, she fancied herself a schoolgirl enjoying a 
holiday escapade.  It was an amour, she thought, with a young cousin 
to whom she was going to be married.  And so she trembled at the 
slightest noise and dread lest parents should hear her, while making 
the delicious experiments and suffering the voluptuous terrors 
attendant on a girl's first slip from the path of virtue.

Nana in those days was subject to the fancies a sentimental girl 
will indulge in.  She would gaze at the moon for hours.  One night 
she had a mind to go down into the garden with Georges when all the 
household was asleep.  When there they strolled under the trees, 
their arms round each other's waists, and finally went and laid down 
in the grass, where the dew soaked them through and through.  On 
another occasion, after a long silence up in the bedroom, she fell 
sobbing on the lad's neck, declaring in broken accents that she was 
afraid of dying.  She would often croon a favorite ballad of Mme 
Lerat's, which was full of flowers and birds.  The song would melt 
her to tears, and she would break off in order to clasp Georges in a 
passionate embrace and to extract from him vows of undying 
affection.  In short she was extremely silly, as she herself would 
admit when they both became jolly good fellows again and sat up 
smoking cigarettes on the edge of the bed, dangling their bare legs 
over it the while and tapping their heels against its wooden side.

But what utterly melted the young woman's heart was Louiset's 
arrival.  She had an access of maternal affection which was as 
violent as a mad fit.  She would carry off her boy into the sunshine 
outside to watch him kicking about; she would dress him like a 
little prince and roll with him in the grass.  The moment he arrived 
she decided that he was to sleep near her, in the room next hers, 
where Mme Lerat, whom the country greatly affected, used to begin 
snoring the moment her head touched the pillow.  Louiset did not 
hurt Zizi's position in the least.  On the contrary, Nana said that 
she had now two children, and she treated them with the same wayward 
tenderness.  At night, more than ten times running, she would leave 
Zizi to go and see if Louiset were breathing properly, but on her 
return she would re-embrace her Zizi and lavish on him the caresses 
that had been destined for the child.  She played at being Mamma 
while he wickedly enjoyed being dandled in the arms of the great 
wench and allowed himself to be rocked to and fro like a baby that 
is being sent to sleep.  It was all so delightful, and Nana was so 
charmed with her present existence, that she seriously proposed to 
him never to leave the country.  They would send all the other 
people away, and he, she and the child would live alone.  And with 
that they would make a thousand plans till daybreak and never once 
hear Mme Lerat as she snored vigorously after the fatigues of a day 
spent in picking country flowers.

This charming existence lasted nearly a week.  Count Muffat used to 
come every evening and go away again with disordered face and 
burning hands.  One evening he was not even received, as Steiner had 
been obliged to run up to Paris.  He was told that Madame was not 
well.  Nana grew daily more disgusted at the notion of deceiving 
Georges.  He was such an innocent lad, and he had such faith in her!  
She would have looked on herself as the lowest of the low had she 
played him false.  Besides, it would have sickened her to do so!  
Zoe, who took her part in this affair in mute disdain, believed that 
Madame was growing senseless.

On the sixth day a band of visitors suddenly blundered into Nana's 
idyl.  She had, indeed, invited a whole swarm of people under the 
belief that none of them would come.  And so one fine afternoon she 
was vastly astonished and annoyed to see an omnibus full of people 
pulling up outside the gate of La Mignotte.

"It's us!" cried Mignon, getting down first from the conveyance and 
extracting then his sons Henri and Charles.

Labordette thereupon appeared and began handing out an interminable 
file of ladies--Lucy Stewart, Caroline Hequet, Tatan Nene, Maria 
Blond.  Nana was in hopes that they would end there, when La Faloise 
sprang from the step in order to receive Gaga and her daughter 
Amelie in his trembling arms.  That brought the number up to eleven 
people.  Their installation proved a laborious undertaking.  There 
were five spare rooms at La Mignotte, one of which was already 
occupied by Mme Lerat and Louiset.  The largest was devoted to the 
Gaga and La Faloise establishment, and it was decided that Amelie 
should sleep on a truckle bed in the dressing room at the side.  
Mignon and his two sons had the third room.  Labordette the fourth.  
There thus remained one room which was transformed into a dormitory 
with four beds in it for Lucy, Caroline, Tatan and Maria.  As to 
Steiner, he would sleep on the divan in the drawing room.  At the 
end of an hour, when everyone was duly settled, Nana, who had begun 
by being furious, grew enchanted at the thought of playing hostess 
on a grand scale.  The ladies complimented her on La Mignotte.  
"It's a stunning property, my dear!"  And then, too, they brought 
her quite a whiff of Parisian air, and talking all together with 
bursts of laughter and exclamation and emphatic little gestures, 
they gave her all the petty gossip of the week just past.  By the 
by, and how about Bordenave?  What had he said about her prank?  Oh, 
nothing much!  After bawling about having her brought back by the 
police, he had simply put somebody else in her place at night.  
Little Violaine was the understudy, and she had even obtained a very 
pretty success as the Blonde Venus.  Which piece of news made Nana 
rather serious.

It was only four o'clock in the afternoon, and there was some talk 
of taking a stroll around.

"Oh, I haven't told you," said Nana, "I was just off to get up 
potatoes when you arrived."

Thereupon they all wanted to go and dig potatoes without even 
changing their dresses first.  It was quite a party.  The gardener 
and two helpers were already in the potato field at the end of the 
grounds.  The ladies knelt down and began fumbling in the mold with 
their beringed fingers, shouting gaily whenever they discovered a 
potato of exceptional size.  It struck them as so amusing!  But 
Tatan Nene was in a state of triumph!  So many were the potatoes she 
had gathered in her youth that she forgot herself entirely and gave 
the others much good advice, treating them like geese the while.  
The gentlemen toiled less strenuously.  Mignon looked every inch the 
good citizen and father and made his stay in the country an occasion 
for completing his boys' education.  Indeed, he spoke to them of 
Parmentier!

Dinner that evening was wildly hilarious.  The company ate 
ravenously.  Nana, in a state of great elevation, had a warm 
disagreement with her butler, an individual who had been in service 
at the bishop's palace in Orleans.  The ladies smoked over their 
coffee.  An earsplitting noise of merrymaking issued from the open 
windows and died out far away under the serene evening sky while 
peasants, belated in the lanes, turned and looked at the flaring 
rooms.

"It's most tiresome that you're going back the day after tomorrow," 
said Nana.  "But never mind, we'll get up an excursion all the 
same!"

They decided to go on the morrow, Sunday, and visit the ruins of the 
old Abbey of Chamont, which were some seven kilometers distant.  
Five carriages would come out from Orleans, take up the company 
after lunch and bring them back to dinner at La Mignotte at about 
seven.  It would be delightful.

That evening, as his wont was, Count Muffat mounted the hill to ring 
at the outer gate.  But the brightly lit windows and the shouts of 
laughter astonished him.  When, however, he recognized Mignon's 
voice, he understood it all and went off, raging at this new 
obstacle, driven to extremities, bent on some violent act.  Georges 
passed through a little door of which he had the key, slipped along 
the staircase walls and went quietly up into Nana's room.  Only he 
had to wait for her till past midnight.  She appeared at last in a 
high state of intoxication and more maternal even than on the 
previous nights.  Whenever she had drunk anything she became so 
amorous as to be absurd.  Accordingly she now insisted on his 
accompanying her to the Abbey of Chamont.  But he stood out against 
this; he was afraid of being seen.  If he were to be seen driving 
with her there would be an atrocious scandal.  But she burst into 
tears and evinced the noisy despair of a slighted woman.  And he 
thereupon consoled her and formally promised to be one of the party.

"So you do love me very much," she blurted out.  "Say you love me 
very much.  Oh, my darling old bear, if I were to die would you feel 
it very much?  Confess!"

At Les Fondettes the near neighborhood of Nana had utterly 
disorganized the party.  Every morning during lunch good Mme Hugon 
returned to the subject despite herself, told her guests the news 
the gardener had brought her and gave evidence of the absorbing 
curiosity with which notorious courtesans are able to inspire even 
the worthiest old ladies.  Tolerant though she was, she was revolted 
and maddened by a vague presentiment of coming ill, which frightened 
her in the evenings as thoroughly as if a wild beast had escaped 
from a menagerie and were known to be lurking in the countryside.

She began trying to pick a little quarrel with her guests, whom she 
each and all accused of prowling round La Mignotte.  Count 
Vandeuvres had been seen laughing on the highroad with a golden-
haired lady, but he defended himself against the accusation; he 
denied that it was Nana, the fact being that Lucy had been with him 
and had told him how she had just turned her third prince out of 
doors.  The Marquis de Chouard used also to go out every day, but 
his excuse was doctor's orders.  Toward Daguenet and Fauchery Mme 
Hugon behaved unjustly too.  The former especially never left Les 
Fondettes, for he had given up the idea of renewing the old 
connection and was busy paying the most respectful attentions to 
Estelle.  Fauchery also stayed with the Muffat ladies.  On one 
occasion only he had met Mignon with an armful of flowers, putting 
his sons through a course of botanical instruction in a by-path.  
The two men had shaken hands and given each other the news about 
Rose.  She was perfectly well and happy; they had both received a 
letter from her that morning in which she besought them to profit by 
the fresh country air for some days longer.  Among all her guests 
the old lady spared only Count Muffat and Georges.  The count, who 
said he had serious business in Orleans, could certainly not be 
running after the bad woman, and as to Georges, the poor child was 
at last causing her grave anxiety, seeing that every evening he was 
seized with atrocious sick headaches which kept him to his bed in 
broad daylight.

Meanwhile Fauchery had become the Countess Sabine's faithful 
attendant in the absence during each afternoon of Count Muffat.  
Whenever they went to the end of the park he carried her campstool 
and her sunshade.  Besides, he amused her with the original 
witticisms peculiar to a second-rate journalist, and in so doing he 
prompted her to one of those sudden intimacies which are allowable 
in the country.  She had apparently consented to it from the first, 
for she had grown quite a girl again in the society of a young man 
whose noisy humor seemed unlikely to compromize her.  But now and 
again, when for a second or two they found themselves alone behind 
the shrubs, their eyes would meet; they would pause amid their 
laughter, grow suddenly serious and view one another darkly, as 
though they had fathomed and divined their inmost hearts.

On Friday a fresh place had to be laid at lunch time.  M. Theophile 
Venot, whom Mme Hugon remembered to have invited at the Muffats' 
last winter, had just arrived.  He sat stooping humbly forward and 
behaved with much good nature, as became a man of no account, nor 
did he seem to notice the anxious deference with which he was 
treated.  When he had succeeded in getting the company to forget his 
presence he sat nibbling small lumps of sugar during dessert, 
looking sharply up at Daguenet as the latter handed Estelle 
strawberries and listening to Fauchery, who was making the countess 
very merry over one of his anecdotes.  Whenever anyone looked at HIM 
he smiled in his quiet way.  When the guests rose from table he took 
the count's arm and drew him into the park.  He was known to have 
exercised great influence over the latter ever since the death of 
his mother.  Indeed, singular stories were told about the kind of 
dominion which the ex-lawyer enjoyed in that household.  Fauchery, 
whom his arrival doubtless embarrassed, began explaining to Georges 
and Daguenet the origin of the man's wealth.  It was a big lawsuit 
with the management of which the Jesuits had entrusted him in days 
gone by.  In his opinion the worthy man was a terrible fellow 
despite his gentle, plump face and at this time of day had his 
finger in all the intrigues of the priesthood.  The two young men 
had begun joking at this, for they thought the little old gentleman 
had an idiotic expression.  The idea of an unknown Venot, a gigantic 
Venot, acting for the whole body of the clergy, struck them in the 
light of a comical invention.  But they were silenced when, still 
leaning on the old man's arm, Count Muffat reappeared with blanched 
cheeks and eyes reddened as if by recent weeping.

I bet they've been chatting about hell," muttered Fauchery in a 
bantering tone.

The Countess Sabine overheard the remark.  She turned her head 
slowly, and their eyes met in that long gaze with which they were 
accustomed to sound one another prudently before venturing once for 
all.

After the breakfast it was the guests' custom to betake themselves 
to a little flower garden on a terrace overlooking the plain.  This 
Sunday afternoon was exquisitely mild.  There had been signs of rain 
toward ten in the morning, but the sky, without ceasing to be 
covered, had, as it were, melted into milky fog, which now hung like 
a cloud of luminous dust in the golden sunlight.  Soon Mme Hugon 
proposed that they should step down through a little doorway below 
the terrace and take a walk on foot in the direction of Gumieres and 
as far as the Choue.  She was fond of walking and, considering her 
threescore years, was very active.  Besides, all her guests declared 
that there was no need to drive.  So in a somewhat straggling order 
they reached the wooden bridge over the river.  Fauchery and 
Daguenet headed the column with the Muffat ladies and were followed 
by the count and the marquis, walking on either side of Mme Hugon, 
while Vandeuvres, looking fashionable and out of his element on the 
highroad, marched in the rear, smoking a cigar.  M. Venot, now 
slackening, now hastening his pace, passed smilingly from group to 
group, as though bent on losing no scrap of conversation.

"To think of poor dear Georges at Orleans!" said Mme Hugon.  "He was 
anxious to consult old Doctor Tavernier, who never goes out now, on 
the subject of his sick headaches.  Yes, you were not up, as he went 
off before seven o'clock.  But it'll be a change for him all the 
same."

She broke off, exclaiming:

"Why, what's making them stop on the bridge?"

The fact was the ladies and Fauchery and Daguenet were standing 
stock-still on the crown of the bridge.  They seemed to be 
hesitating as though some obstacle or other rendered them uneasy and 
yet the way lay clear before them.

"Go on!" cried the count.

They never moved and seemed to be watching the approach of something 
which the rest had not yet observed.  Indeed the road wound 
considerably and was bordered by a thick screen of poplar trees.  
Nevertheless, a dull sound began to grow momentarily louder, and 
soon there was a noise of wheels, mingled with shouts of laughter 
and the cracking of whips.  Then suddenly five carriages came into 
view, driving one behind the other.  They were crowded to bursting, 
and bright with a galaxy of white, blue and pink costumes.

"What is it?" said Mme Hugon in some surprise.

Then her instinct told her, and she felt indignant at such an 
untoward invasion of her road.

"Oh, that woman!" she murmured.  "Walk on, pray walk on.  Don't 
appear to notice."

But it was too late.  The five carriages which were taking Nana and 
her circle to the ruins of Chamont rolled on to the narrow wooden 
bridge.  Fauchery, Daguenet and the Muffat ladies were forced to 
step backward, while Mme Hugon and the others had also to stop in 
Indian file along the roadside.  It was a superb ride past!  The 
laughter in the carriages had ceased, and faces were turned with an 
expression of curiosity.  The rival parties took stock of each other 
amid a silence broken only by the measured trot of the horses.  In 
the first carriage Maria Blond and Tatan Nene were lolling backward 
like a pair of duchesses, their skirts swelling forth over the 
wheels, and as they passed they cast disdainful glances at the 
honest women who were walking afoot.  Then came Gaga, filling up a 
whole seat and half smothering La Faloise beside her so that little 
but his small anxious face was visible.  Next followed Caroline 
Hequet with Labordette, Lucy Stewart with Mignon and his boys and at 
the close of all Nana in a victoria with Steiner and on a bracket 
seat in front of her that poor, darling Zizi, with his knees jammed 
against her own.

"It's the last of them, isn't it?" the countess placidly asked 
Fauchery, pretending at the same time not to recognize Nana.

The wheel of the victoria came near grazing her, but she did not 
step back.  The two women had exchanged a deeply significant glance.  
It was, in fact, one of those momentary scrutinies which are at once 
complete and definite.  As to the men, they behaved unexceptionably.  
Fauchery and Daguenet looked icy and recognized no one.  The 
marquis, more nervous than they and afraid of some farcical 
ebullition on the part of the ladies, had plucked a blade of grass 
and was rolling it between his fingers.  Only Vandeuvres, who had 
stayed somewhat apart from the rest of the company, winked 
imperceptibly at Lucy, who smiled at him as she passed.

"Be careful!" M. Venot had whispered as he stood behind Count 
Muffat.

The latter in extreme agitation gazed after this illusive vision of 
Nana while his wife turned slowly round and scrutinized him.  Then 
he cast his eyes on the ground as though to escape the sound of 
galloping hoofs which were sweeping away both his senses and his 
heart.  He could have cried aloud in his agony, for, seeing Georges 
among Nana's skirts, he understood it all now.  A mere child!  He 
was brokenhearted at the thought that she should have preferred a 
mere child to him!  Steiner was his equal, but that child!

Mme Hugon, in the meantime, had not at once recognized Georges.  
Crossing the bridge, he was fain to jump into the river, but Nana's 
knees restrained him.  Then white as a sheet and icy cold, he sat 
rigidly up in his place and looked at no one.  It was just possible 
no one would notice him.

"Oh, my God!" said the old lady suddenly.  "Georges is with her!"

The carriages had passed quite through the uncomfortable crowd of 
people who recognized and yet gave no sign of recognition.  The 
short critical encounter seemed to have been going on for ages.  And 
now the wheels whirled away the carriageloads of girls more gaily 
than ever.  Toward the fair open country they went, amid the 
buffetings of the fresh air of heaven.  Bright-colored fabrics 
fluttered in the wind, and the merry laughter burst forth anew as 
the voyagers began jesting and glancing back at the respectable 
folks halting with looks of annoyance at the roadside.  Turning 
round, Nana could see the walking party hesitating and then 
returning the way they had come without crossing the bridge.  Mme 
Hugon was leaning silently on Count Muffat's arm, and so sad was her 
look that no one dared comfort her.

"I say, did you see Fauchery, dear?" Nana shouted to Lucy, who was 
leaning out of the carriage in front.  "What a brute he was!  He 
shall pay out for that.  And Paul, too, a fellow I've been so kind 
to!  Not a sign!  They're polite, I'm sure."

And with that she gave Steiner a terrible dressing, he having 
ventured to suggest that the gentlemen's attitude had been quite as 
it should be.  So then they weren't even worth a bow?  The first 
blackguard that came by might insult them?  Thanks!  He was the 
right sort, too, he was!  It couldn't be better!  One ought always 
to bow to a woman.

"Who's the tall one?" asked Lucy at random, shouting through the 
noise of the wheels.

"It's the Countess Muffat," answered Steiner.

"There now!  I suspected as much," said Nana.  "Now, my dear fellow, 
it's all very well her being a countess, for she's no better than 
she should be.  Yes, yes, she's no better that she should be.  You 
know, I've got an eye for such things, I have!  And now I know your 
countess as well as if I had been at the making of her!  I'll bet 
you that she's the mistress of that viper Fauchery!  I tell you, 
she's his mistress!  Between women you guess that sort of thing at 
once!"

Steiner shrugged his shoulders.  Since the previous day his 
irritation had been hourly increasing.  He had received letters 
which necessitated his leaving the following morning, added to which 
he did not much appreciate coming down to the country in order to 
sleep on the drawing-room divan.

"And this poor baby boy!" Nana continued, melting suddenly at sight 
of Georges's pale face as he still sat rigid and breathless in front 
of her.

"D'you think Mamma recognized me?" he stammered at last.

"Oh, most surely she did!  Why, she cried out!  But it's my fault.  
He didn't want to come with us; I forced him to.  Now listen, Zizi, 
would you like me to write to your mamma?  She looks such a kind, 
decent sort of lady!  I'll tell her that I never saw you before and 
that it was Steiner who brought you with him for the first time 
today."

"No, no, don't write," said Georges in great anxiety.  "I'll explain 
it all myself.  Besides, if they bother me about it I shan't go home 
again."

But he continued plunged in thought, racking his brains for excuses 
against his return home in the evening.  The five carriages were 
rolling through a flat country along an interminable straight road 
bordered by fine trees.  The country was bathed in a silvery-gray 
atmosphere.  The ladies still continued shouting remarks from 
carriage to carriage behind the backs of the drivers, who chuckled 
over their extraordinary fares.  Occasionally one of them would rise 
to her feet to look at the landscape and, supporting herself on her 
neighbor's shoulder, would grow extremely excited till a sudden jolt 
brought her down to the seat again.  Caroline Hequet in the meantime 
was having a warm discussion with Labordette.  Both of them were 
agreed that Nana would be selling her country house before three 
months were out, and Caroline was urging Labordette to buy it back 
for her for as little as it was likely to fetch.  In front of them 
La Faloise, who was very amorous and could not get at Gaga's 
apoplectic neck, was imprinting kisses on her spine through her 
dress, the strained fabric of which was nigh splitting, while 
Amelie, perching stiffly on the bracket seat, was bidding them be 
quiet, for she was horrified to be sitting idly by, watching her 
mother being kissed.  In the next carriage Mignon, in order to 
astonish Lucy, was making his sons recite a fable by La Fontaine.  
Henri was prodigious at this exercise; he could spout you one 
without pause or hesitation.  But Maria Blond, at the head of the 
procession, was beginning to feel extremely bored.  She was tired of 
hoaxing that blockhead of a Tatan Nene with a story to the effect 
that the Parisian dairywomen were wont to fabricate eggs with a 
mixture of paste and saffron.  The distance was too great: were they 
never going to get to their destination?  And the question was 
transmitted from carriage to carriage and finally reached Nana, who, 
after questioning her driver, got up and shouted:

"We've not got a quarter of an hour more to go.  You see that church 
behind the trees down there?"

Then she continued:

"Do you know, it appears the owner of the Chateau de Chamont is an 
old lady of Napoleon's time?  Oh, SHE was a merry one!  At least, so 
Joseph told me, and he heard it from the servants at the bishop's 
palace.  There's no one like it nowadays, and for the matter of 
that, she's become goody-goody."

"What's her name?" asked Lucy.

"Madame d'Anglars."

"Irma d'Anglars--I knew her!" cried Gaga.

Admiring exclamations burst from the line of carriages and were 
borne down the wind as the horses quickened their trot.  Heads were 
stretched out in Gaga's direction; Maria Blond and Tatan Nene turned 
round and knelt on the seat while they leaned over the carriage 
hood, and the air was full of questions and cutting remarks, 
tempered by a certain obscure admiration.  Gaga had known her!  The 
idea filled them all with respect for that far-off past.

"Dear me, I was young then," continued Gaga.  "But never mind, I 
remember it all.  I saw her pass.  They said she was disgusting in 
her own house, but, driving in her carriage, she WAS just smart!  
And the stunning tales about her!  Dirty doings and money flung 
about like one o'clock!  I don't wonder at all that she's got a fine 
place.  Why, she used to clean out a man's pockets as soon as look 
at him.  Irma d'Anglars still in the land of the living!  Why, my 
little pets, she must be near ninety."

At this the ladies became suddenly serious.  Ninety years old!  The 
deuce, there wasn't one of them, as Lucy loudly declared, who would 
live to that age.  They were all done for.  Besides, Nana said she 
didn't want to make old bones; it wouldn't be amusing.  They were 
drawing near their destination, and the conversation was interrupted 
by the cracking of whips as the drivers put their horses to their 
best paces.  Yet amid all the noise Lucy continued talking and, 
suddenly changing the subject, urged Nana to come to town with them 
all to-morrow.  The exhibition was soon to close, and the ladies 
must really return to Paris, where the season was surpassing their 
expectations.  But Nana was obstinate.  She loathed Paris; she 
wouldn't set foot there yet!

"Eh, darling, we'll stay?" she said, giving Georges's knees a 
squeeze, as though  Steiner were of no account.

The carriages had pulled up abruptly, and in some surprise the 
company got out on some waste ground at the bottom of a small hill.  
With his whip one of the drivers had to point them out the ruins of 
the old Abbey of Chamont where they lay hidden among trees.  It was 
a great sell!  The ladies voted them silly.  Why, they were only a 
heap of old stones with briers growing over them and part of a 
tumble-down tower.  It really wasn't worth coming a couple of 
leagues to see that!  Then the driver pointed out to them the 
countryseat, the park of which stretched away from the abbey, and he 
advised them to take a little path and follow the walls surrounding 
it.  They would thus make the tour of the place while the carriages 
would go and await them in the village square.  It was a delightful 
walk, and the company agreed to the proposition.

"Lord love me, Irma knows how to take care of herself!" said Gaga, 
halting before a gate at the corner of the park wall abutting on the 
highroad.

All of them stood silently gazing at the enormous bush which stopped 
up the gateway.  Then following the little path, they skirted the 
park wall, looking up from time to time to admire the trees, whose 
lofty branches stretched out over them and formed a dense vault of 
greenery.  After three minutes or so they found themselves in front 
of a second gate.  Through this a wide lawn was visible, over which 
two venerable oaks cast dark masses of shadow.  Three minutes 
farther on yet another gate afforded them an extensive view of a 
great avenue, a perfect corridor of shadow, at the end of which a 
bright spot of sunlight gleamed like a star.  They stood in silent, 
wondering admiration, and then little by little exclamations burst 
from their lips.  They had been trying hard to joke about it all 
with a touch of envy at heart, but this decidedly and immeasurably 
impressed them.  What a genius that Irma was!  A sight like this 
gave you a rattling notion of the woman!  The trees stretched away 
and away, and there were endlessly recurrent patches of ivy along 
the wall with glimpses of lofty roofs and screens of poplars 
interspersed with dense masses of elms and aspens.  Was there no end 
to it then?  The ladies would have liked to catch sight of the 
mansion house, for they were weary of circling on and on, weary of 
seeing nothing but leafy recesses through every opening they came 
to.  They took the rails of the gate in their hands and pressed 
their faces against the ironwork.  And thus excluded and isolated, a 
feeling of respect began to overcome them as they thought of the 
castle lost to view in surrounding immensity.  Soon, being quite 
unused to walking, they grew tired.  And the wall did not leave off; 
at every turn of the small deserted path the same range of gray 
stones stretched ahead of them.  Some of them began to despair of 
ever getting to the end of it and began talking of returning.  But 
the more their long walk fatigued them, the more respectful they 
became, for at each successive step they were increasingly impressed 
by the tranquil, lordly dignity of the domain.

"It's getting silly, this is!" said Caroline Hequet, grinding her 
teeth.

Nana silenced her with a shrug.  For some moments past she had been 
rather pale and extremely serious and had not spoken a single word.  
Suddenly the path gave a final turn; the wall ended, and as they 
came out on the village square the mansion house stood before them 
on the farther side of its grand outer court.  All stopped to admire 
the proud sweep of the wide steps, the twenty frontage windows, the 
arrangement of the three wings, which were built of brick framed by 
courses of stone.  Henri IV had erewhile inhabited this historic 
mansion, and his room, with its great bed hung with Genoa velvet, 
was still preserved there.  Breathless with admiration, Nana gave a 
little childish sigh.

"Great God!" she whispered very quietly to herself.

But the party were deeply moved when Gaga suddenly announced that 
Irma herself was standing yonder in front of the church.  She 
recognized her perfectly.  She was as upright as of old, the hoary 
campaigner, and that despite her age, and she still had those eyes 
which flashed when she moved in that proud way of hers!  Vespers 
were just over, and for a second or two Madame stood in the church 
porch.  She was dressed in a dark brown silk and looked very simple 
and very tall, her venerable face reminding one of some old marquise 
who had survived the horrors of the Great Revolution.  In her right 
hand a huge Book of Hours shone in the sunlight, and very slowly she 
crossed the square, followed some fifteen paces off by a footman in 
livery.  The church was emptying, and all the inhabitants of Chamont 
bowed before her with extreme respect.  An old man even kissed her 
hand, and a woman wanted to fall on her knees.  Truly this was a 
potent queen, full of years and honors.  She mounted her flight of 
steps and vanished from view.

"That's what one attains to when one has methodical habits!" said 
Mignon with an air of conviction, looking at his sons and improving 
the occasion.

Then everybody said his say.  Labordette thought her extraordinarily 
well preserved.  Maria Blond let slip a foul expression and vexed 
Lucy, who declared that one ought to honor gray hairs.  All the 
women, to sum up, agreed that she was a perfect marvel.  Then the 

Back to Full Books