[Several] Works by Emile Zola

him.

"You know," she murmured, "if she fails it won't be my fault.  But 
they're so strange when they're young!"

There was a considerable bustle round the table, and the waiters 
became very active.  After the third course the entrees had made 
their appearance; they consisted of pullets a la marechale, fillets 
of sole with shallot sauce and escalopes of Strasbourg pate.  The 
manager, who till then had been having Meursault served, now offered 
Chambertin and Leoville.  Amid the slight hubbub which the change of 
plates involved Georges, who was growing momentarily more 
astonished, asked Daguenet if all the ladies present were similarly 
provided with children, and the other, who was amused by this 
question, gave him some further details.  Lucy Stewart was the 
daughter of a man of English origin who greased the wheels of the 
trains at the Gare du Nord; she was thirty-nine years old and had 
the face of a horse but was adorable withal and, though consumptive, 
never died.  In fact, she was the smartest woman there and 
represented three princes and a duke.  Caroline Hequet, born at 
Bordeaux, daughter of a little clerk long since dead of shame, was 
lucky enough to be possessed of a mother with a head on her 
shoulders, who, after having cursed her, had made it up again at the 
end of a year of reflection, being minded, at any rate, to save a 
fortune for her daughter.  The latter was twenty-five years old and 
very passionless and was held to be one of the finest women it is 
possible to enjoy.  Her price never varied.  The mother, a model of 
orderliness, kept the accounts and noted down receipts and 
expenditures with severe precision.  She managed the whole household 
from some small lodging two stories above her daughter's, where, 
moreover, she had established a workroom for dressmaking and plain 
sewing.  As to Blanche de Sivry, whose real name was Jacqueline 
Bandu, she hailed from a village near Amiens.  Magnificent in 
person, stupid and untruthful in character, she gave herself out as 
the granddaughter of a general and never owned to her thirty-two 
summers.  The Russians had a great taste for her, owing to her 
embonpoint.  Then Daguenet added a rapid word or two about the rest.  
There was Clarisse Besnus, whom a lady had brought up from Saint-
Aubin-sur-Mer in the capacity of maid while the lady's husband had 
started her in quite another line.  There was Simonne Cabiroche, the 
daughter of a furniture dealer in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, who 
had been educated in a large boarding school with a view to becoming 
a governess.  Finally there were Maria Blond and Louise Violaine and 
Lea de Horn, who had all shot up to woman's estate on the pavements 
of Paris, not to mention Tatan Nene, who had herded cows in 
Champagne till she was twenty.

Georges listened and looked at these ladies, feeling dizzy and 
excited by the coarse recital thus crudely whispered in his ear, 
while behind his chair the waiters kept repeating in respectful 
tones:

"Pullets a la marechale; fillets of sole with ravigote sauce."

"My dear fellow," said Daguenet, giving him the benefit of his 
experience, "don't take any fish; it'll do you no good at this time 
of night.  And be content with Leoville: it's less treacherous."

A heavy warmth floated upward from the candelabras, from the dishes 
which were being handed round, from the whole table where thirty-
eight human beings were suffocating.  And the waiters forgot 
themselves and ran when crossing the carpet, so that it was spotted 
with grease.  Nevertheless, the supper grew scarce any merrier.  The 
ladies trifled with their meat, left half of it uneaten.  Tatan Nene 
alone partook gluttonously of every dish.  At that advanced hour of 
the night hunger was of the nervous order only, a mere whimsical 
craving born of an exasperated stomach.

At Nana's side the old gentleman refused every dish offered him; he 
had only taken a spoonful of soup, and he now sat in front of his 
empty plate, gazing silently about.  There was some subdued yawning, 
and occasionally eyelids closed and faces became haggard and white.  
It was unutterably slow, as it always was, according to Vandeuvres's 
dictum.  This sort of supper should be served anyhow if it was to be 
funny, he opined.  Otherwise when elegantly and conventionally done 
you might as well feed in good society, where you were not more 
bored than here.  Had it not been for Bordenave, who was still 
bawling away, everybody would have fallen asleep.  That rum old 
buffer Bordenave, with his leg duly stretched on its chair, was 
letting his neighbors, Lucy and Rose, wait on him as though he were 
a sultan.  They were entirely taken up with him, and they helped him 
and pampered him and watched over his glass and his plate, and yet 
that did not prevent his complaining.

"Who's going to cut up my meat for me?  I can't; the table's a 
league away."

Every few seconds Simonne rose and took up a position behind his 
back in order to cut his meat and his bread.  All the women took a 
great interest in the things he ate.  The waiters were recalled, and 
he was stuffed to suffocation.  Simonne having wiped his mouth for 
him while Rose and Lucy were changing his plate, her act struck him 
as very pretty and, deigning at length to show contentment:

"There, there, my daughter," he said, "that's as it should be.  
Women are made for that!"

There was a slight reawakening, and conversation became general as 
they finished discussing some orange sherbet.  The hot roast was a 
fillet with truffles, and the cold roast a galantine of guinea fowl 
in jelly.  Nana, annoyed by the want of go displayed by her guests, 
had begun talking with the greatest distinctness.

"You know the Prince of Scots has already had a stage box reserved 
so as to see the Blonde Venus when he comes to visit the 
exhibition."

"I very much hope that all the princes will come and see it," 
declared Bordenave with his mouth full.

"They are expecting the shah of Persia next Sunday," said Lucy 
Stewart.  Whereupon Rose Mignon spoke of the shah's diamonds.  He 
wore a tunic entirely covered with gems; it was a marvel, a flaming 
star; it represented millions.  And the ladies, with pale faces and 
eyes glittering with covetousness, craned forward and ran over the 
names of the other kings, the other emperors, who were shortly 
expected.  All of them were dreaming of some royal caprice, some 
night to be paid for by a fortune.

"Now tell me, dear boy," Caroline Hequet asked Vandeuvres, leaning 
forward as she did so, "how old's the emperor of Russia?"

"Oh, he's 'present time,'" replied the count, laughing.  "Nothing to 
be done in that quarter, I warn you."

Nana made pretense of being hurt.  The witticism appeared somewhat 
too stinging, and there was a murmur of protest.  But Blanche gave a 
description of the king of Italy, whom she had once seen at Milan.  
He was scarcely good looking, and yet that did not prevent him 
enjoying all the women.  She was put out somewhat when Fauchery 
assured her that Victor Emmanuel could not come to the exhibition.  
Louise Violaine and Lea favored the emperor of Austria, and all of a 
sudden little Maria Blond was heard saying:

"What an old stick the king of Prussia is!  I was at Baden last 
year, and one was always meeting him about with Count Bismarck."

"Dear me, Bismarck!" Simonne interrupted.  "I knew him once, I did.  
A charming man."

"That's what I was saying yesterday," cried Vandeuvres, "but nobody 
would believe me."

And just as at Countess Sabine's, there ensued a long discussion 
about Bismarck.  Vandeuvres repeated the same phrases, and for a 
moment or two one was again in the Muffats' drawing room, the only 
difference being that the ladies were changed.  Then, just as last 
night, they passed on to a discussion on music, after which, 
Foucarmont having let slip some mention of the assumption of the 
veil of which Paris was still talking, Nana grew quite interested 
and insisted on details about Mlle de Fougeray.  Oh, the poor child, 
fancy her burying herself alive like that!  Ah well, when it was a 
question of vocation!  All round the table the women expressed 
themselves much touched, and Georges, wearied at hearing these 
things a second time discussed, was beginning to ask Daguenet about 
Nana's ways in private life, when the conversation veered fatefully 
back to Count Bismarck.  Tatan Nene bent toward Labordette to ask 
him privily who this Bismarck might be, for she did not know him.  
Whereupon Labordette, in cold blood, told her some portentous 
anecdotes.  This Bismarck, he said, was in the habit of eating raw 
meat and when he met a woman near his den would carry her off 
thither on his back; at forty years of age he had already had as 
many as thirty-two children that way.

"Thirty-two children at forty!" cried Tatan Nene, stupefied and yet 
convinced.  "He must be jolly well worn out for his age."

There was a burst of merriment, and it dawned on her that she was 
being made game of.

"You sillies!  How am I to know if you're joking?"

Gaga, meanwhile, had stopped at the exhibition.  Like all these 
ladies, she was delightedly preparing for the fray.  A good season, 
provincials and foreigners rushing into Paris!  In the long run, 
perhaps, after the close of the exhibition she would, if her 
business had flourished, be able to retire to a little house at 
Jouvisy, which she had long had her eye on.

"What's to be done?" she said to La Faloise.  "One never gets what 
one wants!  Oh, if only one were still really loved!"

Gaga behaved meltingly because she had felt the young man's knee 
gently placed against her own.  He was blushing hotly and lisping as 
elegantly as ever.  She weighed him at a glance.  Not a very heavy 
little gentleman, to be sure, but then she wasn't hard to please.  
La Faloise obtained her address.

"Just look there," murmured Vandeuvres to Clarisse.  "I think Gaga's 
doing you out of your Hector."

"A good riddance, so far as I'm concerned," replied the actress.  
"That fellow's an idiot.  I've already chucked him downstairs three 
times.  You know, I'm disgusted when dirty little boys run after old 
women."

She broke off and with a little gesture indicated Blanche, who from 
the commencement of dinner had remained in a most uncomfortable 
attitude, sitting up very markedly, with the intention of displaying 
her shoulders to the old distinguished-looking gentleman three seats 
beyond her.

"You're being left too," she resumed.

Vandeuvres smiled his thin smile and made a little movement to 
signify he did not care.  Assuredly 'twas not he who would ever have 
prevented poor, dear Blanche scoring a success.  He was more 
interested by the spectacle which Steiner was presenting to the 
table at large.  The banker was noted for his sudden flames.  That 
terrible German Jew who brewed money, whose hands forged millions, 
was wont to turn imbecile whenever he became enamored of a woman.  
He wanted them all too!  Not one could make her appearance on the 
stage but he bought her, however expensive she might be.  Vast sums 
were quoted.  Twice had his furious appetite for courtesans ruined 
him.  The courtesans, as Vandeuvres used to say, avenged public 
morality by emptying his moneybags.  A big operation in the 
saltworks of the Landes had rendered him powerful on 'change, and so 
for six weeks past the Mignons had been getting a pretty slice out 
of those same saltworks.  But people were beginning to lay wagers 
that the Mignons would not finish their slice, for Nana was showing 
her white teeth.  Once again Steiner was in the toils, and so deeply 
this time that as he sat by Nana's side he seemed stunned; he ate 
without appetite; his lip hung down; his face was mottled.  She had 
only to name a figure.  Nevertheless, she did not hurry but 
continued playing with him, breathing her merry laughter into his 
hairy ear and enjoying the little convulsive movements which kept 
traversing his heavy face.  There would always be time enough to 
patch all that up if that ninny of a Count Muffat were really to 
treat her as Joseph did Potiphar's wife.

"Leoville or Chambertin?" murmured a waiter, who came craning 
forward between Nana and Steiner just as the latter was addressing 
her in a low voice.

"Eh, what?" he stammered, losing his head.  "Whatever you like--I 
don't care."

Vandeuvres gently nudged Lucy Stewart, who had a very spiteful 
tongue and a very fierce invention when once she was set going.  
That evening Mignon was driving her to exasperation.

"He would gladly be bottleholder, you know," she remarked to the 
count.  "He's in hopes of repeating what he did with little 
Jonquier.  You remember: Jonquier was Rose's man, but he was sweet 
on big Laure.  Now Mignon procured Laure for Jonquier and then came 
back arm in arm with him to Rose, as if he were a husband who had 
been allowed a little peccadillo.  But this time the thing's going 
to fail.  Nana doesn't give up the men who are lent her."

"What ails Mignon that he should be looking at his wife in that 
severe way?" asked Vandeuvres.

He leaned forward and saw Rose growing exceedingly amorous toward 
Fauchery.  This was the explanation of his neighbor's wrath.  He 
resumed laughingly:

"The devil, are you jealous?"

"Jealous!" said Lucy in a fury.  "Good gracious, if Rose is wanting 
Leon I give him up willingly--for what he's worth!  That's to say, 
for a bouquet a week and the rest to match!  Look here, my dear boy, 
these theatrical trollops are all made the same way.  Why, Rose 
cried with rage when she read Leon's article on Nana; I know she 
did.  So now, you understand, she must have an article, too, and 
she's gaining it.  As for me, I'm going to chuck Leon downstairs--
you'll see!"

She paused to say "Leoville" to the waiter standing behind her with 
his two bottles and then resumed in lowered tones:

"I don't want to shout; it isn't my style.  But she's a cocky slut 
all the same.  If I were in her husband's place I should lead her a 
lovely dance.  Oh, she won't be very happy over it.  She doesn't 
know my Fauchery: a dirty gent he is, too, palling up with women 
like that so as to get on in the world.  Oh, a nice lot they are!"

Vandeuvres did his best to calm her down, but Bordenave, deserted by 
Rose and by Lucy, grew angry and cried out that they were letting 
Papa perish of hunger and thirst.  This produced a fortunate 
diversion.  Yet the supper was flagging; no one was eating now, 
though platefuls of cepes a' l'italienne and pineapple fritters a la 
Pompadour were being mangled.  The champagne, however, which had 
been drunk ever since the soup course, was beginning little by 
little to warm the guests into a state of nervous exaltation.  They 
ended by paying less attention to decorum than before.  The women 
began leaning on their elbows amid the disordered table 
arrangements, while the men, in order to breathe more easily, pushed 
their chairs back, and soon the black coats appeared buried between 
the light-colored bodices, and bare shoulders, half turned toward 
the table, began to gleam as soft as silk.  It was too hot, and the 
glare of the candles above the table grew ever yellower and duller.  
Now and again, when a women bent forward, the back of her neck 
glowed golden under a rain of curls, and the glitter of a diamond 
clasp lit up a lofty chignon.  There was a touch of fire in the 
passing jests, in the laughing eyes, in the sudden gleam of white 
teeth, in the reflection of the candelabra on the surface of a glass 
of champagne.  The company joked at the tops of their voices, 
gesticulated, asked questions which no one answered and called to 
one another across the whole length of the room.  But the loudest 
din was made by the waiters; they fancied themselves at home in the 
corridors of their parent restaurant; they jostled one another and 
served the ices and the dessert to an accompaniment of guttural 
exclamations.

"My children," shouted Bordenave, "you know we're playing tomorrow.  
Be careful!  Not too much champagne!"

"As far as I'm concerned," said Foucarmont, "I've drunk every 
imaginable kind of wine in all the four quarters of the globe.  
Extraordinary liquors some of 'em, containing alcohol enough to kill 
a corpse!  Well, and what d'you think?  Why, it never hurt me a bit.  
I can't make myself drunk.  I've tried and I can't."

He was very pale, very calm and collected, and he lolled back in his 
chair, drinking without cessation.

"Never mind that," murmured Louise Violaine.  "Leave off; you've had 
enough.  It would be a funny business if I had to look after you the 
rest of the night."

Such was her state of exaltation that Lucy Stewart's cheeks were 
assuming a red, consumptive flush, while Rose Mignon with moist 
eyelids was growing excessively melting.  Tatan Nene, greatly 
astonished at the thought that she had overeaten herself, was 
laughing vaguely over her own stupidity.  The others, such as 
Blanche, Caroline, Simonne and Maria, were all talking at once and 
telling each other about their private affairs--about a dispute with 
a coachman, a projected picnic and innumerable complex stories of 
lovers stolen or restored.  Meanwhile a young man near Georges, 
having evinced a desire to kiss Lea de Horn, received a sharp rap, 
accompanied by a "Look here, you, let me go!" which was spoken in a 
tone of fine indignation; and Georges, who was now very tipsy and 
greatly excited by the sight of Nana, hesitated about carrying out a 
project which he had been gravely maturing.  He had been planning, 
indeed, to get under the table on all fours and to go and crouch at 
Nana's feet like a little dog.  Nobody would have seen him, and he 
would have stayed there in the quietest way.  But when at Lea's 
urgent request Daguenet had told the young man to sit still, Georges 
all at once felt grievously chagrined, as though the reproof had 
just been leveled at him.  Oh, it was all silly and slow, and there 
was nothing worth living for!  Daguenet, nevertheless, began 
chaffing and obliged him to swallow a big glassful of water, asking 
him at the same time what he would do if he were to find himself 
alone with a woman, seeing that three glasses of champagne were able 
to bowl him over.

"Why, in Havana," resumed Foucarmont, "they make a spirit with a 
certain wild berry; you think you're swallowing fire!  Well now, one 
evening I drank more than a liter of it, and it didn't hurt me one 
bit.  Better than that, another time when we were on the coast of 
Coromandel some savages gave us I don't know what sort of a mixture 
of pepper and vitriol, and that didn't hurt me one bit.  I can't 
make myself drunk."

For some moments past La Faloise's face opposite had excited his 
displeasure.  He began sneering and giving vent to disagreeable 
witticisms.  La Faloise, whose brain was in a whirl, was behaving 
very restlessly and squeezing up against Gaga.  But at length he 
became the victim of anxiety; somebody had just taken his 
handkerchief, and with drunken obstinacy he demanded it back again, 
asked his neighbors about it, stooped down in order to look under 
the chairs and the guests' feet.  And when Gaga did her best to 
quiet him:

"It's a nuisance," he murmured, "my initials and my coronet are 
worked in the corner.  They may compromise me."

"I say, Monsieur Falamoise, Lamafoise, Mafaloise!" shouted 
Foucarmont, who thought it exceedingly witty thus to disfigure the 
young man's name ad infinitum.

But La Faloise grew wroth and talked with a stutter about his 
ancestry.  He threatened to send a water bottle at Foucarmont's 
head, and Count de Vandeuvres had to interfere in order to assure 
him that Foucarmont was a great joker.  Indeed, everybody was 
laughing.  This did for the already flurried young man, who was very 
glad to resume his seat and to begin eating with childlike 
submissiveness when in a loud voice his cousin ordered him to feed.  
Gaga had taken him back to her ample side; only from time to time he 
cast sly and anxious glances at the guests, for he ceased not to 
search for his handkerchief.

Then Foucarmont, being now in his witty vein, attacked Labordette 
right at the other end of the table.  Louise Violaine strove to make 
him hold his tongue, for, she said, "when he goes nagging at other 
people like that it always ends in mischief for me."  He had 
discovered a witticism which consisted in addressing Labordette as 
"Madame," and it must have amused him greatly, for he kept on 
repeating it while Labordette tranquilly shrugged his shoulders and 
as constantly replied:

"Pray hold your tongue, my dear fellow; it's stupid."

But as Foucarmont failed to desist and even became insulting without 
his neighbors knowing why, he left off answering him and appealed to 
Count Vandeuvres.

"Make your friend hold his tongue, monsieur.  I don't wish to become 
angry."

Foucarmont had twice fought duels, and he was in consequence most 
politely treated and admitted into every circle.  But there was now 
a general uprising against him.  The table grew merry at his 
sallies, for they thought him very witty, but that was no reason why 
the evening should be spoiled.  Vandeuvres, whose subtle countenance 
was darkening visibly, insisted on his restoring Labordette his sex.  
The other men--Mignon, Steiner and Bordenave--who were by this time 
much exalted, also intervened with shouts which drowned his voice.  
Only the old gentleman sitting forgotten next to Nana retained his 
stately demeanor and, still smiling in his tired, silent way, 
watched with lackluster eyes the untoward finish of the dessert.

"What do you say to our taking coffee in here, duckie?" said 
Bordenave.  "We're very comfortable."

Nana did not give an immediate reply.  Since the beginning of supper 
she had seemed no longer in her own house.  All this company had 
overwhelmed and bewildered her with their shouts to the waiters, the 
loudness of their voices and the way in which they put themselves at 
their ease, just as though they were in a restaurant.  Forgetting 
her role of hostess, she busied herself exclusively with bulky 
Steiner, who was verging on apoplexy beside her.  She was listening 
to his proposals and continually refusing them with shakes of the 
head and that temptress's laughter which is peculiar to a voluptuous 
blonde.  The champagne she had been drinking had flushed her a rosy-
red; her lips were moist; her eyes sparkled, and the banker's offers 
rose with every kittenish movement of her shoulders, with every 
little voluptuous lift and fall of her throat, which occurred when 
she turned her head.  Close by her ear he kept espying a sweet 
little satiny corner which drove him crazy.  Occasionally Nana was 
interrupted, and then, remembering her guests, she would try and be 
as pleased as possible in order to show that she knew how to 
receive.  Toward the end of the supper she was very tipsy.  It made 
her miserable to think of it, but champagne had a way of 
intoxicating her almost directly!  Then an exasperating notion 
struck her.  In behaving thus improperly at her table, these ladies 
were showing themselves anxious to do her an ugly turn.  Oh yes, she 
could see it all distinctly.  Lucy had given Foucarmont a wink in 
order to egg him on against Labordette, while Rose, Caroline and the 
others were doing all they could to stir up the men.  Now there was 
such a din you couldn't hear your neighbor speak, and so the story 
would get about that you might allow yourself every kind of liberty 
when you supped at Nana's.  Very well then!  They should see!  She 
might be tipsy, if you like, but she was still the smartest and most 
ladylike woman there.

"Do tell them to serve the coffee here, duckie," resumed Bordenave.  
"I prefer it here because of my leg."

But Nana had sprung savagely to her feet after whispering into the 
astonished ears of Steiner and the old gentleman:

"It's quite right; it'll teach me to go and invite a dirty lot like 
that."

Then she pointed to the door of the dining room and added at the top 
of her voice:

"If you want coffee it's there, you know."

The company left the table and crowded toward the dining room 
without noticing Nana's indignant outburst.  And soon no one was 
left in the drawing room save Bordenave, who advanced cautiously, 
supporting himself against the wall and cursing away at the 
confounded women who chucked Papa the moment they were chock-full.  
The waiters behind him were already busy removing the plates and 
dishes in obedience to the loudly voiced orders of the manager.  
They rushed to and fro, jostled one another, caused the whole table 
to vanish, as a pantomime property might at the sound of the chief 
scene-shifter's whistle.  The ladies and gentlemen were to return to 
the drawing room after drinking their coffee.

"By gum, it's less hot here," said Gaga with a slight shiver as she 
entered the dining room.

The window here had remained open.  Two lamps illuminated the table, 
where coffee and liqueurs were set out.  There were no chairs, and 
the guests drank their coffee standing, while the hubbub the waiters 
were making in the next room grew louder and louder.  Nana had 
disappeared, but nobody fretted about her absence.  They did without 
her excellently well, and everybody helped himself and rummaged in 
the drawers of the sideboard in search of teaspoons, which were 
lacking.  Several groups were formed; people separated during supper 
rejoined each other, and there was an interchange of glances, of 
meaning laughter and of phrases which summed up recent situations.

"Ought not Monsieur Fauchery to come and lunch with us one of these 
days, Auguste?" said Rose Mignon.

Mignon, who was toying with his watch chain, eyed the journalist for 
a second or two with his severe glance.  Rose was out of her senses.  
As became a good manager, he would put a stop to such spendthrift 
courses.  In return for a notice, well and good, but afterward, 
decidedly not.  Nevertheless, as he was fully aware of his wife's 
wrongheadedness and as he made it a rule to wink paternally at a 
folly now and again, when such was necessary, he answered amiably 
enough:

"Certainly, I shall be most happy.  Pray come tomorrow, Monsieur 
Fauchery."

Lucy Stewart heard this invitation given while she was talking with 
Steiner and Blanche and, raising her voice, she remarked to the 
banker:

"It's a mania they've all of them got.  One of them even went so far 
as to steal my dog.  Now, dear boy, am I to blame if you chuck her?"

Rose turned round.  She was very pale and gazed fixedly at Steiner 
as she sipped her coffee.  And then all the concentrated anger she 
felt at his abandonment of her flamed out in her eyes.  She saw more 
clearly than Mignon; it was stupid in him to have wished to begin 
the Jonquier ruse a second time--those dodgers never succeeded twice 
running.  Well, so much the worse for him!  She would have Fauchery!  
She had been getting enamored of him since the beginning of supper, 
and if Mignon was not pleased it would teach him greater wisdom!

"You are not going to fight?" said Vandeuvres, coming over to Lucy 
Stewart.

"No, don't be afraid of that!  Only she must mind and keep quiet, or 
I let the cat out of the bag!"

Then signing imperiously to Fauchery:

"I've got your slippers at home, my little man.  I'll get them taken 
to your porter's lodge for you tomorrow."

He wanted to joke about it, but she swept off, looking like a queen.  
Clarisse, who had propped herself against a wall in order to drink a 
quiet glass of kirsch, was seen to shrug her shoulders.  A pleasant 
business for a man!  Wasn't it true that the moment two women were 
together in the presence of their lovers their first idea was to do 
one another out of them?  It was a law of nature!  As to herself, 
why, in heaven's name, if she had wanted to she would have torn out 
Gaga's eyes on Hector's account!  But la, she despised him!  Then as 
La Faloise passed by, she contented herself by remarking to him:

"Listen, my friend, you like 'em well advanced, you do!  You don't 
want 'em ripe; you want 'em mildewed!"

La Faloise seemed much annoyed and not a little anxious.  Seeing 
Clarisse making game of him, he grew suspicious of her.

"No humbug, I say," he muttered.  "You've taken my handkerchief.  
Well then, give it back!"

"He's dreeing us with that handkerchief of his!" she cried.  "Why, 
you ass, why should I have taken it from you?"

"Why should you?" he said suspiciously.  "Why, that you may send it 
to my people and compromise me."

In the meantime Foucarmont was diligently attacking the liqueurs.  
He continued to gaze sneeringly at Labordette, who was drinking his 
coffee in the midst of the ladies.  And occasionally he gave vent to 
fragmentary assertions, as thus: "He's the son of a horse dealer; 
some say the illegitimate child of a countess.  Never a penny of 
income, yet always got twenty-five louis in his pocket!  Footboy to 
the ladies of the town!  A big lubber, who never goes with any of 
'em!  Never, never, never!" he repeated, growing furious.  "No, by 
Jove!  I must box his ears."

He drained a glass of chartreuse.  The chartreuse had not the 
slightest effect upon him; it didn't affect him "even to that 
extent," and he clicked his thumbnail against the edge of his teeth.  
But suddenly, just as he was advancing upon Labordette, he grew ashy 
white and fell down in a heap in front of the sideboard.  He was 
dead drunk.  Louise Violaine was beside herself.  She had been quite 
right to prophesy that matters would end badly, and now she would 
have her work cut out for the remainder of the night.  Gaga 
reassured her.  She examined the officer with the eye of a woman of 
experience and declared that there was nothing much the matter and 
that the gentleman would sleep like that for at least a dozen or 
fifteen hours without any serious consequences.  Foucarmont was 
carried off.

"Well, where's Nana gone to?" asked Vandeuvres.

Yes, she had certainly flown away somewhere on leaving the table.  
The company suddenly recollected her, and everybody asked for her.  
Steiner, who for some seconds had been uneasy on her account, asked 
Vandeuvres about the old gentleman, for he, too, had disappeared.  
But the count reassured him--he had just brought the old gentleman 
back.  He was a stranger, whose name it was useless to mention.  
Suffice it to say that he was a very rich man who was quite pleased 
to pay for suppers!  Then as Nana was once more being forgotten, 
Vandeuvres saw Daguenet looking out of an open door and beckoning to 
him.  And in the bedroom he found the mistress of the house sitting 
up, white-lipped and rigid, while Daguenet and Georges stood gazing 
at her with an alarmed expression.

"What IS the matter with you?" he asked in some surprise.

She neither answered nor turned her head, and he repeated his 
question.

"Why, this is what's the matter with me," she cried out at length; 
"I won't let them make bloody sport of me!"

Thereupon she gave vent to any expression that occurred to her.  
Yes, oh yes, SHE wasn't a ninny--she could see clearly enough.  They 
had been making devilish light of her during supper and saying all 
sorts of frightful things to show that they thought nothing of her!  
A pack of sluts who weren't fit to black her boots!  Catch her 
bothering herself again just to be badgered for it after!  She 
really didn't know what kept her from chucking all that dirty lot 
out of the house!  And with this, rage choked her and her voice 
broke down in sobs.

"Come, come, my lass, you're drunk," said Vandeuvres, growing 
familiar.  "You must be reasonable."

No, she would give her refusal now; she would stay where she was.

"I am drunk--it's quite likely!  But I want people to respect me!"

For a quarter of an hour past Daguenet and Georges had been vainly 
beseeching her to return to the drawing room.  She was obstinate, 
however; her guests might do what they liked; she despised them too 
much to come back among them.

No, she never would, never.  They might tear her in pieces before 
she would leave her room!

"I ought to have had my suspicions," she resumed.

"It's that cat of a Rose who's got the plot up!  I'm certain Rose'll 
have stopped that respectable woman coming whom I was expecting 
tonight."

She referred to Mme Robert.  Vandeuvres gave her his word of honor 
that Mme Robert had given a spontaneous refusal.  He listened and he 
argued with much gravity, for he was well accustomed to similar 
scenes and knew how women in such a state ought to be treated.  But 
the moment he tried to take hold of her hands in order to lift her 
up from her chair and draw her away with him she struggled free of 
his clasp, and her wrath redoubled.  Now, just look at that!  They 
would never get her to believe that Fauchery had not put the Count 
Muffat off coming!  A regular snake was that Fauchery, an envious 
sort, a fellow capable of growing mad against a woman and of 
destroying her whole happiness.  For she knew this--the count had 
become madly devoted to her!  She could have had him!

"Him, my dear, never!" cried Vandeuvres, forgetting himself and 
laughing loud.

"Why not?" she asked, looking serious and slightly sobered.

"Because he's thoroughly in the hands of the priests, and if he were 
only to touch you with the tips of his fingers he would go and 
confess it the day after.  Now listen to a bit of good advice.  
Don't let the other man escape you!"

She was silent and thoughtful for a moment or two.  Then she got up 
and went and bathed her eyes.  Yet when they wanted to take her into 
the dining room she still shouted "No!" furiously.  Vandeuvres left 
the bedroom, smiling and without further pressing her, and the 
moment he was gone she had an access of melting tenderness, threw 
herself into Daguenet's arms and cried out:

"Ah, my sweetie, there's only you in the world.  I love you!  YES, I 
love you from the bottom of my heart!  Oh, it would be too nice if 
we could always live together.  My God!  How unfortunate women are!"

Then her eye fell upon Georges, who, seeing them kiss, was growing 
very red, and she kissed him too.  Sweetie could not be jealous of a 
baby!  She wanted Paul and Georges always to agree, because it would 
be so nice for them all three to stay like that, knowing all the 
time that they loved one another very much.  But an extraordinary 
noise disturbed them: someone was snoring in the room.  Whereupon 
after some searching they perceived Bordenave, who, since taking his 
coffee, must have comfortably installed himself there.  He was 
sleeping on two chairs, his head propped on the edge of the bed and 
his leg stretched out in front.  Nana thought him so funny with his 
open mouth and his nose moving with each successive snore that she 
was shaken with a mad fit of laughter.  She left the room, followed 
by Daguenet and Georges, crossed the dining room, entered the 
drawing room, her merriment increasing at every step.

"Oh, my dear, you've no idea!" she cried, almost throwing herself 
into Rose's arms.  "Come and see it."

All the women had to follow her.  She took their hands coaxingly and 
drew them along with her willy-nilly, accompanying her action with 
so frank an outburst of mirth that they all of them began laughing 
on trust.  The band vanished and returned after standing 
breathlessly for a second or two round Bordenave's lordly, 
outstretched form.  And then there was a burst of laughter, and when 
one of them told the rest to be quiet Bordenave's distant snorings 
became audible.

It was close on four o'clock.  In the dining room a card table had 
just been set out, at which Vandeuvres, Steiner, Mignon and 
Labordette had taken their seats.  Behind them Lucy and Caroline 
stood making bets, while Blanche, nodding with sleep and 
dissatisfied about her night, kept asking Vandeuvres at intervals of 
five minutes if they weren't going soon.  In the drawing room there 
was an attempt at dancing.  Daguenet was at the piano or "chest of 
drawers," as Nana called it.  She did not want a "thumper," for Mimi 
would play as many waltzes and polkas as the company desired.  But 
the dance was languishing, and the ladies were chatting drowsily 
together in the corners of sofas.  Suddenly, however, there was an 
outburst of noise.  A band of eleven young men had arrived and were 
laughing loudly in the anteroom and crowding to the drawing room.  
They had just come from the ball at the Ministry of the Interior and 
were in evening dress and wore various unknown orders.  Nana was 
annoyed at this riotous entry, called to the waiters who still 
remained in the kitchen and ordered them to throw these individuals 
out of doors.  She vowed that she had never seen any of them before.  
Fauchery, Labordette, Daguenet and the rest of the men had all come 
forward in order to enforce respectful behavior toward their 
hostess.  Big words flew about; arms were outstretched, and for some 
seconds a general exchange of fisticuffs was imminent.  
Notwithstanding this, however, a little sickly looking light-haired 
man kept insistently repeating:

"Come, come, Nana, you saw us the other evening at Peters' in the 
great red saloon!  Pray remember, you invited us."

The other evening at Peters'?  She did not remember it all.  To 
begin with, what evening?

And when the little light-haired man had mentioned the day, which 
was Wednesday, she distinctly remembered having supped at Peters' on 
the Wednesday, but she had given no invitation to anyone; she was 
almost sure of that.

"However, suppose you HAVE invited them, my good girl," murmured 
Labordette, who was beginning to have his doubts.  "Perhaps you were 
a little elevated."

Then Nana fell a-laughing.  It was quite possible; she really didn't 
know.  So then, since these gentlemen were on the spot, they had her 
leave to come in.  Everything was quietly arranged; several of the 
newcomers found friends in the drawing room, and the scene ended in 
handshakings.  The little sickly looking light-haired man bore one 
of the greatest names in France.  Furthermore, the eleven announced 
that others were to follow them, and, in fact, the door opened every 
few moments, and men in white gloves and official garb presented 
themselves.  They were still coming from the ball at the Ministry.  
Fauchery jestingly inquired whether the minister was not coming, 
too, but Nana answered in a huff that the minister went to the 
houses of people she didn't care a pin for.  What she did not say 
was that she was possessed with a hope of seeing Count Muffat enter 
her room among all that stream of people.  He might quite have 
reconsidered his decision, and so while talking to Rose she kept a 
sharp eye on the door.

Five o'clock struck.  The dancing had ceased, and the cardplayers 
alone persisted in their game.  Labordette had vacated his seat, and 
the women had returned into the drawing room.  The air there was 
heavy with the somnolence which accompanies a long vigil, and the 
lamps cast a wavering light while their burned-out wicks glowed red 
within their globes.  The ladies had reached that vaguely melancholy 
hour when they felt it necessary to tell each other their histories.  
Blanche de Sivry spoke of her grandfather, the general, while 
Clarisse invented a romantic story about a duke seducing her at her 
uncle's house, whither he used to come for the boar hunting.  Both 
women, looking different ways, kept shrugging their shoulders and 
asking themselves how the deuce the other could tell such whoppers!  
As to Lucy Stewart, she quietly confessed to her origin and of her 
own accord spoke of her childhood and of the days when her father, 
the wheel greaser at the Northern Railway Terminus, used to treat 
her to an apple puff on Sundays.

"Oh, I must tell you about it!" cried the little Maria Blond 
abruptly.  "Opposite to me there lives a gentleman, a Russian, an 
awfully rich man!  Well, just fancy, yesterday I received a basket 
of fruit--oh, it just was a basket!  Enormous peaches, grapes as big 
as that, simply wonderful for the time of year!  And in the middle 
of them six thousand-franc notes!  It was the Russian's doing.  Of 
course I sent the whole thing back again, but I must say my heart 
ached a little--when I thought of the fruit!"

The ladies looked at one another and pursed up their lips.  At her 
age little Maria Blond had a pretty cheek!  Besides, to think that 
such things should happen to trollops like her!  Infinite was their 
contempt for her among themselves.  It was Lucy of whom they were 
particularly jealous, for they were beside themselves at the thought 
of her three princes.  Since Lucy had begnn taking a daily morning 
ride in the Bois they all had become Amazons, as though a mania 
possessed them.

Day was about to dawn, and Nana turned her eyes away from the door, 
for she was relinquishing all hope.  The company were bored to 
distraction.  Rose Mignon had refused to sing the "Slipper" and sat 
huddled up on a sofa, chatting in a low voice with Fauchery and 
waiting for Mignon, who had by now won some fifty louis from 
Vandeuvres.  A fat gentleman with a decoration and a serious cast of 
countenance had certainly given a recitation in Alsatian accents of 
"Abraham's Sacrifice," a piece in which the Almighty says, "By My 
blasted Name" when He swears, and Isaac always answers with a "Yes, 
Papa!"  Nobody, however, understood what it was all about, and the 
piece had been voted stupid.  People were at their wits' end how to 
make merry and to finish the night with fitting hilarity.  For a 
moment or two Labordette conceived the idea of denouncing different 
women in a whisper to La Faloise, who still went prowling round each 
individual lady, looking to see if she were hiding his handkerchief 
in her bosom.  Soon, as there were still some bottles of champagne 
on the sideboard, the young men again fell to drinking.  They 
shouted to one another; they stirred each other up, but a dreary 
species of intoxication, which was stupid enough to drive one to 
despair, began to overcome the company beyond hope of recovery.  
Then the little fair-haired fellow, the man who bore one of the 
greatest names in France and had reached his wit's end and was 
desperate at the thought that he could not hit upon something really 
funny, conceived a brilliant notion: he snatched up his bottle of 
champagne and poured its contents into the piano.  His allies were 
convulsed with laughter.

"La now!  Why's he putting champagne into the piano?" asked Tatan 
Nene in great astonishment as she caught sight of him.

"What, my lass, you don't know why he's doing that?" replied 
Labordette solemnly.  "There's nothing so good as champagne for 
pianos.  It gives 'em tone."

"Ah," murmured Tatan Nene with conviction.

And when the rest began laughing at her she grew angry.  How should 
she know?  They were always confusing her.

Decidedly the evening was becoming a big failure.  The night 
threatened to end in the unloveliest way.  In a corner by themselves 
Maria Blond and Lea de Horn had begun squabbling at close quarters, 
the former accusing the latter of consorting with people of 
insufficient wealth.  They were getting vastly abusive over it, 
their chief stumbling block being the good looks of the men in 
question.  Lucy, who was plain, got them to hold their tongues.  
Good looks were nothing, according to her; good figures were what 
was wanted.  Farther off, on a sofa, an attache had slipped his arm 
round Simonne's waist and was trying to kiss her neck, but Simonne, 
sullen and thoroughly out of sorts, pushed him away at every fresh 
attempt with cries of "You're pestering me!" and sound slaps of the 
fan across his face.  For the matter of that, not one of the ladies 
allowed herself to be touched.  Did people take them for light 
women?  Gaga, in the meantime, had once more caught La Faloise and 
had almost hoisted him upon her knees while Clarisse was 
disappearing from view between two gentlemen, shaking with nervous 
laughter as women will when they are tickled.  Round about the piano 
they were still busy with their little game, for they were suffering 
from a fit of stupid imbecillty, which caused each man to jostle his 
fellow in his frantic desire to empty his bottle into the 
instrument.  It was a simple process and a charming one.

"Now then, old boy, drink a glass!  Devil take it, he's a thirsty 
piano!  Hi!  'Tenshun!  Here's another bottle!  You mustn't lose a 
drop!"

Nana's back was turned, and she did not see them.  Emphatically she 
was now falling back on the bulky Steiner, who was seated next to 
her.  So much the worse!  It was all on account of that Muffat, who 
had refused what was offered him.  Sitting there in her white 
foulard dress, which was as light and full of folds as a shift, 
sitting there with drooped eyelids and cheeks pale with the touch of 
intoxication from which she was suffering, she offered herself to 
him with that quiet expression which is peculiar to a good-natured 
courtesan.  The roses in her hair and at her throat had lost their 
leaves, and their stalks alone remained.  Presently Steiner withdrew 
his hand quickly from the folds of her skirt, where he had come in 
contact with the pins that Georges had stuck there.  Some drops of 
blood appeared on his fingers, and one fell on Nana's dress and 
stained it.

"Now the bargain's struck," said Nana gravely.

The day was breaking apace.  An uncertain glimmer of light, fraught 
with a poignant melancholy, came stealing through the windows.  And 
with that the guests began to take their departure.  It was a most 
sour and uncomfortable retreat.  Caroline Hequet, annoyed at the 
loss of her night, announced that it was high time to be off unless 
you were anxious to assist at some pretty scenes.  Rose pouted as if 
her womanly character had been compromised.  It was always so with 
these girls; they didn't know how to behave and were guilty of 
disgusting conduct when they made their first appearance in society!  
And Mignon having cleaned Vandeuvres out completely, the family took 
their departure.  They did not trouble about Steiner but renewed 
their invitation for tomorrow to Fauchery.  Lucy thereupon refused 
the journalist's escort home and sent him back shrilly to his 
"strolling actress."  At this Rose turned round immediately and 
hissed out a "Dirty sow" by way of answer.  But Mignon, who in 
feminine quarrels was always paternal, for his experience was a long 
one and rendered him superior to them, had already pushed her out of 
the house, telling her at the same time to have done.  Lucy came 
downstairs in solitary state behind them.  After which Gaga had to 
carry off La Faloise, ill, sobbing like a child, calling after 
Clarisse, who had long since gone off with her two gentlemen.  
Simonne, too, had vanished.  Indeed, none remained save Tatan, Lea 
and Maria, whom Labordette complaisantly took under his charge.

"Oh, but I don't the least bit want to go to bed!" said Nana.  "One 
ought to find something to do."

She looked at the sky through the windowpanes.  It was a livid sky, 
and sooty clouds were scudding across it.  It was six o'clock in the 
morning.  Over the way, on the opposite side of the Boulevard 
Haussmann, the glistening roofs of the still-slumbering houses were 
sharply outlined against the twilight sky while along the deserted 
roadway a gang of street sweepers passed with a clatter of wooden 
shoes.  As she viewed Paris thus grimly awakening, she was overcome 
by tender, girlish feelings, by a yearning for the country, for 
idyllic scenes, for things soft and white.

"Now guess what you're to do," she said, coming back to Steiner.  
"You're going to take me to the Bois de Boulogne, and we'll drink 
milk there."

She clapped her hands in childish glee.  Without waiting for the 
banker's reply--he naturally consented, though he was really rather 
bored and inclined to think of other things--she ran off to throw a 
pelisse over her shoulders.  In the drawing room there was now no 
one with Steiner save the band of young men.  These had by this time 
dropped the very dregs of their glasses into the piano and were 
talking of going, when one of their number ran in triumphantly.  He 
held in his hands a last remaining bottle, which he had brought back 
with him from the pantry.

"Wait a minute, wait a minute!" he shouted.  "Here's a bottle of 
chartreuse; that'll pick him up!  And now, my young friends, let's 
hook it.  We're blooming idiots."

In the dressing room Nana was compelled to wake up Zoe, who had 
dozed off on a chair.  The gas was still alight, and Zoe shivered as 
she helped her mistress on with her hat and pelisse.

"Well, it's over; I've done what you wanted me to," said Nana, 
speaking familiarly to the maid in a sudden burst of expansive 
confidence and much relieved at the thought that she had at last 
made her election.  "You were quite right; the banker's as good as 
another."

The maid was cross, for she was still heavy with sleep.  She 
grumbled something to the effect that Madame ought to have come to a 
decision the first evening.  Then following her into the bedroom, 
she asked what she was going to do with "those two," meaning 
Bordenave, who was snoring away as usual, and Georges, who had 
slipped in slyly, buried his head in a pillow and, finally falling 
asleep there, was now breathing as lightly and regularly as a 
cherub.  Nana in reply told her that she was to let them sleep on.  
But seeing Daguenet come into the room, she again grew tender.  He 
had been watching her from the kitchen and was looking very 
wretched.

"Come, my sweetie, be reasonable," she said, taking him in her arms 
and kissing him with all sorts of little wheedling caresses.  
"Nothing's changed; you know that it's sweetie whom I always adore!  
Eh, dear?  I had to do it.  Why, I swear to you we shall have even 
nicer times now.  Come tomorrow, and we'll arrange about hours.  Now 
be quick, kiss and hug me as you love me.  Oh, tighter, tighter than 
that!"

And she escaped and rejoined Steiner, feeling happy and once more 
possessed with the idea of drinking milk.  In the empty room the 
Count de Vandeuvres was left alone with the "decorated" man who had 
recited "Abraham's Sacrifice."  Both seemed glued to the card table; 
they had lost count of their whereabouts and never once noticed the 
broad light of day without, while Blanche had made bold to put her 
feet up on a sofa in order to try and get a little sleep.

"Oh, Blanche is with them!" cried Nana.  "We are going to drink 
milk, dear.  Do come; you'll find Vandeuvres here when we return."

Blanche got up lazily.  This time the banker's fiery face grew white 
with annoyance at the idea of having to take that big wench with him 
too.  She was certain to bore him.  But the two women had already 
got him by the arms and were reiterating:

"We want them to milk the cow before our eyes, you know."



CHAPTER V


At the Varietes they were giving the thirty-fourth performance of 
the Blonde Venus.  The first act had just finished, and in the 
greenroom Simonne, dressed as the little laundress, was standing in 
front of a console table, surmounted by a looking glass and situated 
between the two corner doors which opened obliquely on the end of 
the dressing-room passage.  No one was with her, and she was 
scrutinizing her face and rubbing her finger up and down below her 
eyes with a view to putting the finishing touches to her make-up.  
The gas jets on either side of the mirror flooded her with warm, 
crude light.

"Has he arrived?" asked Prulliere, entering the room in his Alpine 
admiral's costume, which was set off by a big sword, enormous top 
boots and a vast tuft of plumes.

"Who d'you mean?" said Simonne, taking no notice of him and laughing 
into the mirror in order to see how her lips looked.

"The prince."

"I don't know; I've just come down.  Oh, he's certainly due here 
tonight; he comes every time!"

Prulliere had drawn near the hearth opposite the console table, 
where a coke fire was blazing and two more gas jets were flaring 
brightly.  He lifted his eyes and looked at the clock and the 
barometer on his right hand and on his left.  They had gilded 
sphinxes by way of adornment in the style of the First Empire.  Then 
he stretched himself out in a huge armchair with ears, the green 
velvet of which had been so worn by four generations of comedians 
that it looked yellow in places, and there he stayed, with moveless 
limbs and vacant eyes, in that weary and resigned attitude peculiar 
to actors who are used to long waits before their turn for going on 
the stage.

Old Bosc, too, had just made his appearance.  He came in dragging 
one foot behind the other and coughing.  He was wrapped in an old 
box coat, part of which had slipped from his shoulder in such a way 
as to uncover the gold-laced cloak of King Dagobert.  He put his 
crown on the piano and for a moment or two stood moodily stamping 
his feet.  His hands were trembling slightly with the first 
beginnings of alcoholism, but he looked a sterling old fellow for 
all that, and a long white beard lent that fiery tippler's face of 
his a truly venerable appearance.  Then in the silence of the room, 
while the shower of hail was whipping the panes of the great window 
that looked out on the courtyard, he shook himself disgustedly.

"What filthy weather!" he growled.

Simonne and Prulliere did not move.  Four or five pictures--a 
landscape, a portrait of the actor Vernet--hung yellowing in the hot 
glare of the gas, and a bust of Potier, one of the bygone glories of 
the Varietes, stood gazing vacant-eyed from its pedestal.  But just 
then there was a burst of voices outside.  It was Fontan, dressed 
for the second act.  He was a young dandy, and his habiliments, even 
to his gloves, were entirely yellow.

"Now say you don't know!" he shouted, gesticulating.  "Today's my 
patron saint's day!"

"What?" asked Simonne, coming up smilingly, as though attracted by 
the huge nose and the vast, comic mouth of the man.  "D'you answer 
to the name of Achille?"

"Exactly so!  And I'm going to get 'em to tell Madame Bron to send 
up champagne after the second act."

For some seconds a bell had been ringing in the distance.  The long-
drawn sound grew fainter, then louder, and when the bell ceased a 
shout ran up the stair and down it till it was lost along the 
passages.  "All on the stage for the second act!  All on the stage 
for the second act!"  The sound drew near, and a little pale-faced 
man passed by the greenroom doors, outside each of which he yelled 
at the top of his shrill voice, "On the stage for the second act!"

"The deuce, it's champagne!" said Prulliere without appearing to 
hear the din.  "You're prospering!"

"If I were you I should have it in from the cafe," old Bosc slowly 
announced.  He was sitting on a bench covered with green velvet, 
with his head against the wall.

But Simonne said that it was one's duty to consider Mme Bron's small 
perquisites.  She clapped her hands excitedly and devoured Fontan 
with her gaze while his long goatlike visage kept up a continuous 
twitching of eyes and nose and mouth.

"Oh, that Fontan!" she murmured.  "There's no one like him, no one 
like him!"

The two greenroom doors stood wide open to the corridor leading to 
the wings.  And along the yellow wall, which was brightly lit up by 
a gas lamp out of view, passed a string of rapidly moving shadows--
men in costume, women with shawls over their scant attire, in a 
word, the whole of the characters in the second act, who would 
shortly make their appearance as masqeuraders in the ball at the 
Boule Noire.  And at the end of the corridor became audible a 
shuffling of feet as these people clattered down the five wooden 
steps which led to the stage.  As the big Clarisse went running by 
Simonne called to her, but she said she would be back directly.  
And, indeed, she reappeared almost at once, shivering in the thin 
tunic and scarf which she wore as Iris.

"God bless me!" she said.  "It isn't warm, and I've left my furs in 
my dressing room!"

Then as she stood toasting her legs in their warm rose-colored 
tights in front of the fireplace she resumed:

"The prince has arrived."

"Oh!" cried the rest with the utmost curiosity.

"Yes, that's why I ran down: I wanted to see.  He's in the first 
stage box to the right, the same he was in on Thursday.  It's the 
third time he's been this week, eh?  That's Nana; well, she's in 
luck's way!  I was willing to wager he wouldn't come again."

Simonne opened her lips to speak, but her remarks were drowned by a 
fresh shout which arose close to the greenroom.  In the passage the 
callboy was yelling at the top of his shrill voice, "They've 
knocked!"

"Three times!" said Simonne when she was again able to speak.  "It's 
getting exciting.  You know, he won't go to her place; he takes her 
to his.  And it seems that he has to pay for it too!"

"Egad!  It's a case of when one 'has to go out,'" muttered Prulliere 
wickedly, and he got up to have a last look at the mirror as became 
a handsome fellow whom the boxes adored.

"They've knocked!  They've knocked!" the callboy kept repeating in 
tones that died gradually away in the distance as he passed through 
the various stories and corridors.

Fontan thereupon, knowing how it had all gone off on the first 
occasion the prince and Nana met, told the two women the whole story 
while they in their turn crowded against him and laughed at the tops 
of their voices whenever he stooped to whisper certain details in 
their ears.  Old Bosc had never budged an inch--he was totally 
indifferent.  That sort of thing no longer interested him now.  He 
was stroking a great tortoise-shell cat which was lying curled up on 
the bench.  He did so quite beautifully and ended by taking her in 
his arms with the tender good nature becoming a worn-out monarch.  
The cat arched its back and then, after a prolonged sniff at the big 
white beard, the gluey odor of which doubtless disgusted her, she 
turned and, curling herself up, went to sleep again on the bench 
beside him.  Bosc remained grave and absorbed.

"That's all right, but if I were you I should drink the champagne at 
the restaurant--its better there," he said, suddenly addressing 
Fontan when he had finished his recital.

"The curtain's up!" cried the callboy in cracked and long-drawn 
accents "The curtain's up!  The curtain's up!"

The shout sounded for some moments, during which there had been a 
noise of rapid footsteps.  Through the suddenly opened door of the 
passage came a burst of music and a far-off murmur of voices, and 
then the door shut to again and you could hear its dull thud as it 
wedged itself into position once more.

A heavy, peaceful, atmosphere again pervaded the greenroom, as 
though the place were situated a hundred leagues from the house 
where crowds were applauding.  Simonne and Clarisse were still on 
the topic of Nana.  There was a girl who never hurried herself!  
Why, yesterday she had again come on too late!  But there was a 
silence, for a tall damsel had just craned her head in at the door 
and, seeing that she had made a mistake, had departed to the other 
end of the passage.  It was Satin.  Wearing a hat and a small veil 
for the nonce she was affecting the manner of a lady about to pay a 
call.

"A pretty trollop!" muttered Prulliere, who had been coming across 
her for a year past at the Cafe des Varietes.  And at this Simonne 
told them how Nana had recognized in Satin an old schoolmate, had 
taken a vast fancy to her and was now plaguing Bordenave to let her 
make a first appearance on the stage.

"How d'ye do?" said Fontan, shaking hands with Mignon and Fauchery, 
who now came into the room.

Old Bosc himself gave them the tips of his fingers while the two 
women kissed Mignon.

"A good house this evening?" queried Fauchery.

"Oh, a splendid one!" replied Prulliere.  "You should see 'em 
gaping."

"I say, my little dears," remarked Mignon, "it must be your turn!"

Oh, all in good time!  They were only at the fourth scene as yet, 
but Bosc got up in obedience to instinct, as became a rattling old 
actor who felt that his cue was coming.  At that very moment the 
callboy was opening the door.

"Monsieur Bosc!" he called.  "Mademoiselle Simonne!"

Simonne flung a fur-lined pelisse briskly over her shoulders and 
went out.  Bosc, without hurrying at all, went and got his crown, 
which he settled on his brow with a rap.  Then dragging himself 
unsteadily along in his greatcoat, he took his departure, grumbling 
and looking as annoyed as a man who has been rudely disturbed.

"You were very amiable in your last notice," continued Fontan, 
addressing Fauchery.  "Only why do you say that comedians are vain?"

"Yes, my little man, why d'you say that?" shouted Mignon, bringing 
down his huge hands on the journalist's slender shoulders with such 
force as almost to double him up.

Prulliere and Clarisse refrained from laughing aloud.  For some time 
past the whole company had been deriving amusement from a comedy 
which was going on in the wings.  Mignon, rendered frantic by his 
wife's caprice and annoyed at the thought that this man Fauchery 
brought nothing but a certain doubiful notoriety to his household, 
had conceived the idea of revenging himself on the journalist by 
overwhelming him with tokens of friendship.  Every evening, 
therefore, when he met him behind scenes he would shower friendly 
slaps on his back and shoulders, as though fairly carried away by an 
outburst of tenderness, and Fauchery, who was a frail, small man in 
comparison with such a giant, was fain to take the raps with a 
strained smile in order not to quarrel with Rose's husband.

"Aha, my buck, you've insulted Fontan," resumed Mignon, who was 
doing his best to force the joke.  "Stand on guard!  One--two--got 
him right in the middle of his chest!"

He lunged and struck the young man with such force that the latter 
grew very pale and could not speak for some seconds.  With a wink 
Clarisse showed the others where Rose Mignon was standing on the 
threshold of the greenroom.  Rose had witnessed the scene, and she 
marched straight up to the journalist, as though she had failed to 
notice her husband and, standing on tiptoe, bare-armed and in baby 
costume, she held her face up to him with a caressing, infantine 
pout.

"Good evening, baby," said Fauchery, kissing her familiarly.

Thus he indemnified himself.  Mignon, however, did not seem to have 
observed this kiss, for everybody kissed his wife at the theater.  
But he laughed and gave the journalist a keen little look.  The 
latter would assurely have to pay for Rose's bravado.

In the passage the tightly shutting door opened and closed again, 
and a tempest of applause was blown as far as the greenroom.  
Simonne came in after her scene.

"Oh, Father Bosc HAS just scored!" she cried.  "The prince was 
writhing with laughter and applauded with the rest as though he had 
been paid to.  I say, do you know the big man sitting beside the 
prince in the stage box?  A handsome man, with a very sedate 
expression and splendid whiskers!"

"It's Count Muffat," replied Fauchery.  "I know that the prince, 
when he was at the empress's the day before yesterday, invited him 
to dinner for tonight.  He'll have corrupted him afterward!"

"So that's Count Muffat!  We know his father-in-law, eh, Auguste?" 
said Rose, addressing her remark to Mignon.  "You know the Marquis 
de Chouard, at whose place I went to sing?  Well, he's in the house 
too.  I noticed him at the back of a box.  There's an old boy for 
you!"

Prulliere, who had just put on his huge plume of feathers, turned 
round and called her.

"Hi, Rose!  Let's go now!"

She ran after him, leaving her sentence unfinished.  At that moment 
Mme Bron, the portress of the theater, passed by the door with an 
immense bouquet in her arms.  Simonne asked cheerfully if it was for 
her, but the porter woman did not vouchsafe an answer and only 
pointed her chin toward Nana's dressing room at the end of the 
passage.  Oh, that Nana!  They were loading her with flowers!  Then 
when Mme Bron returned she handed a letter to Clarisse, who allowed 
a smothered oath to escape her.  That beggar La Faloise again!  
There was a fellow who wouldn't let her alone!  And when she learned 
the gentleman in question was waiting for her at the porter's lodge 
she shrieked:

"Tell him I'm coming down after this act.  I'm going to catch him 
one on the face."

Fontan had rushed forward, shouting:

"Madame Bron, just listen.  Please listen, Madame Bron.  I want you 
to send up six bottles of champagne between the acts."

But the callboy had again made his appearance.  He was out of 
breath, and in a singsong voice he called out:

"All to go on the stage!  It's your turn, Monsieur Fontan.  Make 
haste, make haste!"

"Yes, yes, I'm going, Father Barillot," replied Fontan in a flurry.

And he ran after Mme Bron and continued:

"You understand, eh?  Six bottles of champagne in the greenroom 
between the acts.  It's my patron saint's day, and I'm standing the 
racket."

Simonne and Clarisse had gone off with a great rustling of skirts.  
Everybody was swallowed up in the distance, and when the passage 
door had banged with its usual hollow sound a fresh hail shower was 
heard beating against the windows in the now-silent greenroom.  
Barillot, a small, pale-faced ancient, who for thirty years had been 
a servant in the theater, had advanced familiarly toward Mignon and 
had presented his open snuffbox to him.  This proffer of a pinch and 
its acceptance allowed him a minute's rest in his interminable 
career up and down stairs and along the dressing-room passage.  He 
certainly had still to look up Mme Nana, as he called her, but she 
was one of those who followed her own sweet will and didn't care a 
pin for penalties.  Why, if she chose to be too late she was too 
late!  But he stopped short and murmured in great surprise:

"Well, I never!  She's ready; here she is!  She must know that the 
prince is here."

Indeed, Nana appeared in the corridor.  She was dressed as a fish 
hag: her arms and face were plastered with white paint, and she had 
a couple of red dabs under her eyes.  Without entering the greenroom 
she contented herself by nodding to Mignon and Fauchery.

"How do?  You're all right?"

Only Mignon shook her outstretched hand, and she hied royally on her 
way, followed by her dresser, who almost trod on her heels while 
stooping to adjust the folds of her skirt.  In the rear of the 
dresser came Satin, closing the procession and trying to look quite 
the lady, though she was already bored to death.

"And Steiner?" asked Mignon sharply.

"Monsieur Steiner has gone away to the Loiret," said Barillot, 
preparing to return to the neighborhood of the stage.  "I expect 
he's gone to buy a country place in those parts."

"Ah yes, I know, Nana's country place."

Mignon had grown suddenly serious.  Oh, that Steiner!  He had 
promised Rose a fine house in the old days!  Well, well, it wouldn't 
do to grow angry with anybody.  Here was a position that would have 
to be won again.  From fireplace to console table Mignon paced, sunk 
in thought yet still unconquered by circumstances.  There was no one 
in the greenroom now save Fauchery and himself.  The journalist was 
tired and had flung himself back into the recesses of the big 
armchair.  There he stayed with half-closed eyes and as quiet as 
quiet could be, while the other glanced down at him as he passed.  
When they were alone Mignon scorned to slap him at every turn.  What 
good would it have done, since nobody would have enjoyed the 
spectacle?  He was far too disinterested to be personally 
entertained by the farcical scenes in which he figured as a 
bantering husband.  Glad of this short-lived respite, Fauchery 
stretched his feet out languidly toward the fire and let his 
upturned eyes wander from the barometer to the clock.  In the course 
of his march Mignon planted himself in front of Potier's bust, 
looked at it without seeming to see it and then turned back to the 
window, outside which yawned the darkling gulf of the courtyard.  
The rain had ceased, and there was now a deep silence in the room, 
which the fierce heat of the coke fire and the flare of the gas jets 
rendered still more oppressive.  Not a sound came from the wings: 
the staircase and the passages were deadly still.

That choking sensation of quiet, which behind the scenes immediately 
precedes the end of an act, had begun to pervade the empty 
greenroom.  Indeed, the place seemed to be drowsing off through very 
breathlessness amid that faint murmur which the stage gives forth 
when the whole troupe are raising the deafening uproar of some grand 
finale.

"Oh, the cows!" Bordenave suddeniy shouted in his hoarse voice.

He had only just come up, and he was already howling complaints 
about two chorus girls who had nearly fallen flat on the stage 
because they were playing the fool together.  When his eye lit on 
Mignon and Fauchery he called them; he wanted to show them 
something.  The prince had just notified a desire to compliment Nana 
in her dressing room during the next interval.  But as he was 
leading them into the wings the stage manager passed.

"Just you find those hags Fernande and Maria!" cried Bordenave 
savagely.

Then calming down and endeavoring to assume the dignified expression 
worn by "heavy fathers," he wiped his face with his pocket 
handkerchief and added:

"I am now going to receive His Highness."

The curtain fell amid a long-drawn salvo of applause.  Then across 
the twilight stage, which was no longer lit up by the footlights, 
there followed a disorderly retreat.  Actors and supers and chorus 
made haste to get back to their dressing rooms while the 
sceneshifters rapidly changed the scenery.  Simonne and Clarisse, 
however, had remained "at the top," talking together in whispers.  
On the stage, in an interval between their lines, they had just 
settled a little matter.  Clarisse, after viewing the thing in every 
light, found she preferred not to see La Faloise, who could never 
decide to leave her for Gaga, and so Simonne was simply to go and 
explain that a woman ought not to be palled up to in that fashion!  
At last she agreed to undertake the mission.

Then Simonne, in her theatrical laundress's attire but with furs 
over her shoulders, ran down the greasy steps of the narrow, winding 
stairs which led between damp walls to the porter's lodge.  This 
lodge, situated between the actors' staircase and that of the 
management, was shut in to right and left by large glass partitions 
and resembled a huge transparent lantern in which two gas jets were 
flaring.

There was a set of pigeonholes in the place in which were piled 
letters and newspapers, while on the table various bouquets lay 
awaiting their recipients in close proximity to neglected heaps of 
dirty plates and to an old pair of stays, the eyelets of which the 
portress was busy mending.  And in the middle of this untidy, ill-
kept storeroom sat four fashionable, white-gloved society men.  They 
occupied as many ancient straw-bottomed chairs and, with an 
expression at once patient and submissive, kept sharply turning 
their heads in Mme Bron's direction every time she came down from 
the theater overhead, for on such occasions she was the bearer of 
replies.  Indeed, she had but now handed a note to a young man who 
had hurried out to open it beneath the gaslight in the vestibule, 
where he had grown slightly pale on reading the classic phrase--how 
often had others read it in that very place!--"Impossible tonight, 
my dearie!  I'm booked!"  La Faloise sat on one of these chairs at 
the back of the room, between the table and the stove.  He seemed 
bent on passing the evening there, and yet he was not quite happy.  
Indeed, he kept tucking up his long legs in his endeavors to escape 
from a whole litter of black kittens who were gamboling wildly round 
them while the mother cat sat bolt upright, staring at him with 
yellow eyes.

"Ah, it's you, Mademoiselle Simonne!  What can I do for you?" asked 
the portress.

Simonne begged her to send La Faloise out to her.  But Mme Bron was 
unable to comply with her wishes all at once.  Under the stairs in a 
sort of deep cupboard she kept a little bar, whither the supers were 
wont to descend for drinks between the acts, and seeing that just at 
that moment there were five or six tall lubbers there who, still 
dressed as Boule Noire masqueraders, were dying of thirst and in a 
great hurry, she lost her head a bit.  A gas jet was flaring in the 
cupboard, within which it was possible to descry a tin-covered table 
and some shelves garnished with half-emptied bottles.  Whenever the 
door of this coalhole was opened a violent whiff of alcohol mingled 
with the scent of stale cooking in the lodge, as well as with the 
penetrating scent of the flowers upon the table.

"Well now," continued the portress when she had served the supers, 
"is it the little dark chap out there you want?"

"No, no; don't be silly!" said Simonne.  "It's the lanky one by the 
side of the stove.  Your cat's sniffing at his trouser legs!"

And with that she carried La Faloise off into the lobby, while the 
other gentlemen once more resigned themselves to their fate and to 
semisuffocation and the masqueraders drank on the stairs and 
indulged in rough horseplay and guttural drunken jests.

On the stage above Bordenave was wild with the sceneshifters, who 
seemed never to have done changing scenes.  They appeared to be 
acting of set purpose--the prince would certainly have some set 
piece or other tumbling on his head.

"Up with it!  Up with it!" shouted the foreman.

At length the canvas at the back of the stage was raised into 
position, and the stage was clear.  Mignon, who had kept his eye on 
Fauchery, seized this opportunity in order to start his pummeling 
matches again.  He hugged him in his long arms and cried:

"Oh, take care!  That mast just missed crushing you!"

And he carried him off and shook him before setting him down again.  
In view of the sceneshifters' exaggerated mirth, Fauchery grew 
white.  His lips trembled, and he was ready to flare up in anger 
while Mignon, shamming good nature, was clapping him on the shoulder 
with such affectionate violence as nearly to pulverize him.

"I value your health, I do!" he kept repeating.  "Egad!  I should be 
in a pretty pickle if anything serious happened to you!"

But just then a whisper ran through their midst: "The prince!  The 
prince!  And everybody turned and looked at the little door which 
opened out of the main body of the house.  At first nothing was 
visible save Bordenave's round back and beefy neck, which bobbed 
down and arched up in a series of obsequious obeisances.  Then the 
prince made his appearance.  Largely and strongly built, light of 
beard and rosy of hue, he was not lacking in the kind of distinction 
peculiar to a sturdy man of pleasure, the square contours of whose 
limbs are clearly defined by the irreproachable cut of a frock coat.  
Behind him walked Count Muffat and the Marquis de Chouard, but this 
particular corner of the theater being dark, the group were lost to 
view amid huge moving shadows.

In order fittingly to address the son of a queen, who would someday 
occupy a throne, Bordenave had assumed the tone of a man exhibiting 
a bear in the street.  In a voice tremulous with false emotion he 
kept repeating:

"If His Highness will have the goodness to follow me--would His 
Highness deign to come this way?  His Highness will take care!"

The prince did not hurry in the least.  On the contrary, he was 
greatly interested and kept pausing in order to look at the 
sceneshifters' maneuvers.  A batten had just been lowered, and the 
group of gaslights high up among its iron crossbars illuminated the 
stage with a wide beam of light.  Muffat, who had never yet been 
behind scenes at a theater, was even more astonished than the rest.  
An uneasy feeling of mingled fear and vague repugnance took 
possession of him.  He looked up into the heights above him, where 
more battens, the gas jets on which were burning low, gleamed like 
galaxies of little bluish stars amid a chaos of iron rods, 
connecting lines of all sizes, hanging stages and canvases spread 
out in space, like huge cloths hung out to dry.

"Lower away!" shouted the foreman unexpectedly.

And the prince himself had to warn the count, for a canvas was 
descending.  They were setting the scenery for the third act, which 
was the grotto on Mount Etna.  Men were busy planting masts in the 
sockets, while others went and took frames which were leaning 
against the walls of the stage and proceeded to lash them with 
strong cords to the poles already in position.  At the back of the 
stage, with a view to producing the bright rays thrown by Vulcan's 
glowing forge, a stand had been fixed by a limelight man, who was 
now lighting various burners under red glasses.  The scene was one 
of confusion, verging to all appearances on absolute chaos, but 
every little move had been prearranged.  Nay, amid all the scurry 
the whistle blower even took a few turns, stepping short as he did 
so, in order to rest his legs.

"His Highness overwhelms me," said Bordenave, still bowing low.  
"The theater is not large, but we do what we can.  Now if His 
Highness deigns to follow me--"

Count Muffat was already making for the dressing-room passage.  The 
really sharp downward slope of the stage had surprised him 
disagreeably, and he owed no small part of his present anxiety to a 
feeling that its boards were moving under his feet.  Through the 
open sockets gas was descried burning in the "dock."  Human voices 
and blasts of air, as from a vault, came up thence, and, looking 
down into the depths of gloom, one became aware of a whole 
subterranean existence.  But just as the count was going up the 
stage a small incident occurred to stop him.  Two little women, 
dressed for the third act, were chatting by the peephole in the 
curtain.  One of them, straining forward and widening the hole with 
her fingers in order the better to observe things, was scanning the 
house beyond.

"I see him," said she sharply.  "Oh, what a mug!"

Horrified, Bordenave had much ado not to give her a kick.  But the 
prince smiled and looked pleased and excited by the remark.  He 
gazed warmly at the little woman who did not care a button for His 
Highness, and she, on her part, laughed unblushingly.  Bordenave, 
however, persuaded the prince to follow him.  Muffat was beginning 
to perspire; he had taken his hat off.  What inconvenienced him most 
was the stuffy, dense, overheated air of the place with its strong, 
haunting smell, a smell peculiar to this part of a theater, and, as 
such, compact of the reek of gas, of the glue used in the 
manufacture of the scenery, of dirty dark nooks and corners and of 
questionably clean chorus girls.  In the passage the air was still 
more suffocating, and one seemed to breathe a poisoned atmosphere, 
which was occasionally relieved by the acid scents of toilet waters 
and the perfumes of various soaps emanating from the dressing rooms.  
The count lifted his eyes as he passed and glanced up the staircase, 
for he was well-nigh startled by the keen flood of light and warmth 
which flowed down upon his back and shoulders.  High up above him 
there was a clicking of ewers and basins, a sound of laughter and of 
people calling to one another, a banging of doors, which in their 
continual opening and shutting allowed an odor of womankind to 
escape--a musky scent of oils and essences mingling with the natural 
pungency exhaled from human tresses.  He did not stop.  Nay, he 
hastened his walk: he almost ran, his skin tingling with the breath 
of that fiery approach to a world he knew nothing of.

"A theater's a curious sight, eh?" said the Marquis de Chouard with 
the enchanted expression of a man who once more finds himself amid 
familiar surroundings.

But Bordenave had at length reached Nana's dressing room at the end 
of the passage.  He quietly turned the door handle; then, cringing 
again:

"If His Highness will have the goodness to enter--"

They heard the cry of a startled woman and caught sight of Nana as, 
stripped to the waist, she slipped behind a curtain while her 
dresser, who had been in the act of drying her, stood, towel in air, 
before them.

"Oh, it IS silly to come in that way!" cried Nana from her hiding 
place.  "Don't come in; you see you mustn't come in!"

Bordenave did not seem to relish this sudden flight.

"Do stay where you were, my dear.  Why, it doesn't matter," he said.  
"It's His Highness.  Come, come, don't be childish."

And when she still refused to make her appearance--for she was 
startled as yet, though she had begun to laugh--he added in peevish, 
paternal tones:

"Good heavens, these gentlemen know perfectly well what a woman 
looks like.  They won't eat you."

"I'm not so sure of that," said the prince wittily.

With that the whole company began laughing in an exaggerated manner 
in order to pay him proper court.

"An exquisitely witty speech--an altogether Parisian speech," as 
Bordenave remarked.

Nana vouchsafed no further reply, but the curtain began moving.  
Doubtless she was making up her mind.  Then Count Muffat, with 
glowing cheeks, began to take stock of the dressing room.  It was a 
square room with a very low ceiling, and it was entirely hung with a 
light-colored Havana stuff.  A curtain of the same material depended 
from a copper rod and formed a sort of recess at the end of the 
room, while two large windows opened on the courtyard of the theater 
and were faced, at a distance of three yards at most, by a leprous-
looking wall against which the panes cast squares of yellow light 
amid the surrounding darkness.  A large dressing glass faced a white 
marble toilet table, which was garnished with a disorderly array of 
flasks and glass boxes containing oils, essences and powders.  The 
count went up to the dressing glass and discovered that he was 
looking very flushed and had small drops of perspiration on his 
forehead.  He dropped his eyes and came and took up a position in 
front of the toilet table, where the basin, full of soapy water, the 
small, scattered, ivory toilet utensils and the damp sponges, 
appeared for some moments to absorb his attention.  The feeling of 
dizziness which he had experienced when he first visited Nana in the 
Boulevard Haussmann once more overcame him.  He felt the thick 
carpet soften under foot, and the gasjets burning by the dressing 
table and by the glass seemed to shoot whistling flames about his 
temples.  For one moment, being afraid of fainting away under the 
influence of those feminine odors which he now re-encountered, 
intensified by the heat under the low-pitched ceiling, he sat down 
on the edge of a softly padded divan between the two windows.  But 
he got up again almost directly and, returning to the dressing 
table, seemed to gaze with vacant eyes into space, for he was 
thinking of a bouquet of tuberoses which had once faded in his 
bedroom and had nearly killed him in their death.  When tuberoses 
are turning brown they have a human smell.

"Make haste!" Bordenave whispered, putting his head in behind the 
curtain.

The prince, however, was listening complaisantly to the Marquis de 
Chouard, who had taken up a hare's-foot on the dressing table and 
had begun explaining the way grease paint is put on.  In a corner of 
the room Satin, with her pure, virginal face, was scanning the 
gentlemen keenly, while the dresser, Mme Jules by name, was getting 
ready Venus' tights and tunic.  Mme Jules was a woman of no age.  
She had the parchment skin and changeless features peculiar to old 
maids whom no one ever knew in their younger years.  She had indeed 
shriveled up in the burning atmosphere of the dressing rooms and 
amid the most famous thighs and bosoms in all Paris.  She wore 
everlastingly a faded black dress, and on her flat and sexless chest 
a perfect forest of pins clustered above the spot where her heart 
should have been.

"I beg your pardon, gentlemen," said Nana, drawing aside the 
curtain, "but you took me by surprise."

They all turned round.  She had not clothed herself at all, had, in 
fact, only buttoned on a little pair of linen stays which half 
revealed her bosom.  When the gentlemen had put her to flight she 
had scarcely begun undressing and was rapidly taking off her 
fishwife's costume.  Through the opening in her drawers behind a 
corner of her shift was even now visible.  There she stood, bare-
armed, bare-shouldered, bare-breasted, in all the adorable glory of 
her youth and plump, fair beauty, but she still held the curtain 
with one hand, as though ready to draw it to again upon the 
slightest provocation.

"Yes, you took me by surprise!  I never shall dare--" she stammered 
in pretty, mock confusion, while rosy blushes crossed her neck and 
shoulders and smiles of embarrassment played about her lips.

"Oh, don't apologize," cried Bordenave, "since these gentlemen 
approve of your good looks!"

But she still tried the hesitating, innocent, girlish game, and, 
shivering as though someone were tickling her, she continued:

"His Highness does me too great an honor.  I beg His Highness will 
excuse my receiving him thus--"

"It is I who am importunate," said the prince, "but, madame, I could 
not resist the desire of complimenting you."

Thereupon, in order to reach her dressing table, she walked very 
quietly and just as she was through the midst of the gentlemen, who 
made way for her to pass.

She had strongly marked hips, which filled her drawers out roundly, 
while with swelling bosom she still continued bowing and smiling her 
delicate little smile.  Suddenly she seemed to recognize Count 
Muffat, and she extended her hand to him as an old friend.  Then she 
scolded him for not having come to her supper party.  His Highness 
deigned to chaff Muffat about this, and the latter stammered and 
thrilled again at the thought that for one second he had held in his 
own feverish clasp a little fresh and perfumed hand.  The count had 
dined excellently at the prince's, who, indeed, was a heroic eater 
and drinker.  Both of them were even a little intoxicated, but they 
behaved very creditably.  To hide the commotion within him Muffat 
could only remark about the heat.

"Good heavens, how hot it is here!" he said.  "How do you manage to 
live in such a temperature, madame?"

And conversation was about to ensue on this topic when noisy voices 
were heard at the dressing-room door.  Bordenave drew back the slide 
over a grated peephole of the kind used in convents.  Fontan was 
outside with Prulliere and Bosc, and all three had bottles under 
their arms and their hands full of glasses.  He began knocking and 
shouting out that it was his patron saint's day and that he was 
standing champagne round.  Nana consulted the prince with a glance.  
Eh!  Oh dear, yes!  His Highness did not want to be in anyone's way; 
he would be only too happy!  But without waiting for permission 
Fontan came in, repeating in baby accents:

"Me not a cad, me pay for champagne!"

Then all of a sudden he became aware of the prince's presence of 
which he had been totally ignorant.  He stopped short and, assuming 
an air of farcical solemnity, announced:

"King Dagobert is in the corridor and is desirous of drinking the 
health of His Royal Highness."

The prince having made answer with a smile, Fontan's sally was voted 
charming.  But the dressing room was too small to accommodate 
everybody, and it became necessary to crowd up anyhow, Satin and Mme 
Jules standing back against the curtain at the end and the men 
clustering closely round the half-naked Nana.  The three actors 
still had on the costumes they had been wearing in the second act, 
and while Prulliere took off his Alpine admiral's cocked hat, the 
huge plume of which would have knocked the ceiling, Bosc, in his 
purple cloak and tinware crown, steadied himself on his tipsy old 
legs and greeted the prince as became a monarch receiving the son of 
a powerful neighbor.  The glasses were filled, and the company began 
clinking them together.

"I drink to Your Highness!" said ancient Bosc royally.

"To the army!" added Prulliere.

"To Venus!" cried Fontan.

The prince complaisantly poised his glass, waited quietly, bowed 
thrice and murmured:

"Madame!  Admiral!  Your Majesty!"

Then he drank it off.  Count Muffat and the Marquis de Chouard had 
followed his example.  There was no more jesting now--the company 
were at court.  Actual life was prolonged in the life of the 
theater, and a sort of solemn farce was enacted under the hot flare 
of the gas.  Nana, quite forgetting that she was in her drawers and 
that a corner of her shift stuck out behind, became the great lady, 
the queen of love, in act to open her most private palace chambers 
to state dignitaries.  In every sentence she used the words "Royal 
Highness" and, bowing with the utmost conviction, treated the 
masqueraders, Bosc and Prulliere, as if the one were a sovereign and 
the other his attendant minister.  And no one dreamed of smiling at 
this strange contrast, this real prince, this heir to a throne, 
drinking a petty actor's champagne and taking his ease amid a 
carnival of gods, a masquerade of royalty, in the society of 
dressers and courtesans, shabby players and showmen of venal beauty.  
Bordenave was simply ravished by the dramatic aspects of the scene 
and began dreaming of the receipts which would have accrued had His 
Highness only consented thus to appear in the second act of the 
Blonde Venus.

"I say, shall we have our little women down?" he cried, becoming 
familiar.

Nana would not hear of it.  But notwithstanding this, she was giving 
way herself.  Fontan attracted her with his comic make-up.  She 
brushed against him and, eying him as a woman in the family way 
might do when she fancies some unpleasant kind of food, she suddenly 
became extremely familiar:

"Now then, fill up again, ye great brute!"

Fontan charged the glasses afresh, and the company drank, repeating 
the same toasts.

"To His Highness!"

"To the army!"

"To Venus!"

But with that Nana made a sign and obtained silence.  She raised her 
glass and cried:

"No, no!  To Fontan!  It's Fontan's day; to Fontan!  To Fontan!"

Then they clinked glasses a third time and drank Fontan with all the 
honors.  The prince, who had noticed the young woman devouring the 
actor with her eyes, saluted him with a "Monsieur Fontan, I drink to 
your success!"  This he said with his customary courtesy.

But meanwhile the tail of his highness's frock coat was sweeping the 
marble of the dressing table.  The place, indeed, was like an alcove 
or narrow bathroom, full as it was of the steam of hot water and 
sponges and of the strong scent of essences which mingled with the 
tartish, intoxicating fumes of the champagne.  The prince and Count 
Muffat, between whom Nana was wedged, had to lift up their hands so 
as not to brush against her hips or her breast with every little 
movement.  And there stood Mme Jules, waiting, cool and rigid as 
ever, while Satin, marveling in the depths of her vicious soul to 
see a prince and two gentlemen in black coats going after a naked 
woman in the society of dressed-up actors, secretly concluded that 
fashionable people were not so very particular after all.

But Father Barillot's tinkling bell approached along the passage.  
At the door of the dressing room he stood amazed when he caught 
sight of the three actors still clad in the costumes which they had 
worn in the second act.

"Gentlemen, gentlemen," he stammered, "do please make haste.  
They've just rung the bell in the public foyer."

"Bah, the public will have to wait!" said Bordenave placidly.

However, as the bottles were now empty, the comedians went upstairs 
to dress after yet another interchange of civilities.  Bosc, having 
dipped his beard in the champagne, had taken it off, and under his 
venerable disguise the drunkard had suddenly reappeared.  His was 
the haggard, empurpled face of the old actor who has taken to drink.  
At the foot of the stairs he was heard remarking to Fontan in his 
boozy voice:

"I pulverized him, eh?"

He was alluding to the prince.

In Nana's dressing room none now remained save His Highness, the 
count and the marquis.  Bordenave had withdrawn with Barillot, whom 
he advised not to knock without first letting Madame know.

"You will excuse me, gentlemen?" asked Nana, again setting to work 
to make up her arms and face, of which she was now particularly 
careful, owing to her nude appearance in the third act.

The prince seated himself by the Marquis de Chouard on the divan, 
and Count Muffat alone remained standing.  In that suffocating heat 
the two glasses of champagne they had drunk had increased their 
intoxication.  Satin, when she saw the gentlemen thus closeting 
themselves with her friend, had deemed it discreet to vanish behind 
the curtain, where she sat waiting on a trunk, much annoyed at being 
compelled to remain motionless, while Mme Jules came and went 
quietly without word or look.

"You sang your numbers marvelously," said the prince.

And with that they began a conversation, but their sentences were 
short and their pauses frequent.  Nana, indeed, was not always able 
to reply.  After rubbing cold cream over her arms and face with the 
palm of her hand she laid on the grease paint with the corner of a 
towel.  For one second only she ceased looking in the glass and 
smilingly stole a glance at the prince.

"His Highness is spoiling me," she murmured without putting down the 
grease paint.

Her task was a complicated one, and the Marquis de Chouard followed 
it with an expression of devout enjoyment.  He spoke in his turn.

"Could not the band accompany you more softly?" he said.  "It drowns 
your voice, and that's an unpardonable crime."

This time Nana did not turn round.  She had taken up the hare's-foot 
and was lightly manipulating it.  All her attention was concentrated 
on this action, and she bent forward over her toilet table so very 
far that the white round contour of her drawers and the little patch 
of chemise stood out with the unwonted tension.  But she was anxious 
to prove that she appreciated the old man's compliment and therefore 
made a little swinging movement with her hips.

Silence reigned.  Mme Jules had noticed a tear in the right leg of 
her drawers.  She took a pin from over her heart and for a second or 
so knelt on the ground, busily at work about Nana's leg, while the 
young woman, without seeming to notice her presence, applied the 
rice powder, taking extreme pains as she did so, to avoid putting 
any on the upper part of her cheeks.  But when the prince remarked 
that if she were to come and sing in London all England would want 
to applaud her, she laughed amiably and turned round for a moment 
with her left cheek looking very white amid a perfect cloud of 
powder.  Then she became suddenly serious, for she had come to the 
operation of rouging.  And with her face once more close to the 
mirror, she dipped her finger in a jar and began applying the rouge 
below her eyes and gently spreading it back toward her temples.  The 
gentlemen maintained a respectful silence.

Count Muffat, indeed, had not yet opened his lips.  He was thinking 
perforce of his own youth.  The bedroom of his childish days had 
been quite cold, and later, when he had reached the age of sixteen 
and would give his mother a good-night kiss every evening, he used 
to carry the icy feeling of the embrace into the world of dreams.  
One day in passing a half-open door he had caught sight of a 
maidservant washing herself, and that was the solitary recollection 
which had in any way troubled his peace of mind from the days of 
puberty till the time of marriage.  Afterward he had found his wife 
strictly obedient to her conjugal duties but had himself felt a 
species of religious dislike to them.  He had grown to man's estate 
and was now aging, in ignorance of the flesh, in the humble 
observance of rigid devotional practices and in obedience to a rule 
of life full of precepts and moral laws.  And now suddenly he was 
dropped down in this actress's dressing room in the presence of this 
undraped courtesan.

He, who had never seen the Countess Muffat putting on her garters, 
was witnessing, amid that wild disarray of jars and basins and that 
strong, sweet perfume, the intimate details of a woman's toilet.  
His whole being was in turmoil; he was terrified by the stealthy, 
all-pervading influence which for some time past Nana's presence had 
been exercising over him, and he recalled to mind the pious accounts 
of diabolic possession which had amused his early years.  He was a 
believer in the devil, and, in a confused kind of way, Nana was he, 
with her laughter and her bosom and her hips, which seemed swollen 
with many vices.  But he promised himself that he would be strong--
nay, he would know how to defend himself.

"Well then, it's agreed," said the prince, lounging quite 
comfortably on the divan.  "You will come to London next year, and 
we shall receive you so cordially that you will never return to 
France again.  Ah, my dear Count, you don't value your pretty women 
enough.  We shall take them all from you!"

"That won't make much odds to him," murmured the Marquis de Chouard 
wickedly, for he occasionally said a risky thing among friends.  
"The count is virtue itself."

Hearing his virtue mentioned, Nana looked at him so comically that 
Muffat felt a keen twinge of annoyance.  But directly afterward he 
was surprised and angry with himself.  Why, in the presence of this 
courtesan, should the idea of being virtuous embarrass him?  He 
could have struck her.  But in attempting to take up a brush Nana 
had just let it drop on the ground, and as she stooped to pick it up 
he rushed forward.  Their breath mingled for one moment, and the 
loosened tresses of Venus flowed over his hands.  But remorse 
mingled with his enjoyment, a kind of enjoyment, moreover, peculiar 
to good Catholics, whom the fear of hell torments in the midst of 
their sin.

At this moment Father Barillot's voice was heard outside the door.

"May I give the knocks, madame?  The house is growing impatient."

"All in good time," answered Nana quietly.

She had dipped her paint brush in a pot of kohl, and with the point 
of her nose close to the glass and her left eye closed she passed it 
delicately along between her eyelashes.  Muffat stood behind her, 
looking on.  He saw her reflection in the mirror, with her rounded 
shoulders and her bosom half hidden by a rosy shadow.  And despite 
all his endeavors he could not turn away his gaze from that face so 
merry with dimples and so worn with desire, which the closed eye 
rendered more seductive.  When she shut her right eye and passed the 
brush along it he understood that he belonged to her.

"They are stamping their feet, madame," the callboy once more cried.  
"They'll end by smashing the seats.  May I give the knocks?"

"Oh, bother!" said Nana impatiently.  "Knock away; I don't care!  If 
I'm not ready, well, they'll have to wait for me!"

She grew calm again and, turning to the gentlemen, added with a 
smile:

"It's true: we've only got a minute left for our talk."

Her face and arms were now finished, and with her fingers she put 
two large dabs of carmine on her lips.  Count Muffat felt more 
excited than ever.  He was ravished by the perverse transformation 
wrought by powders and paints and filled by a lawless yearning for 
those young painted charms, for the too-red mouth and the too-white 
face and the exaggerated eyes, ringed round with black and burning 
and dying for very love.  Meanwhile Nana went behind the curtain for 
a second or two in order to take off her drawers and slip on Venus' 
tights.  After which, with tranquil immodesty, she came out and 
undid her little linen stays and held out her arms to Mme Jules, who 
drew the short-sleeved tunic over them.

"Make haste; they're growing angry!" she muttered.

The prince with half-closed eyes marked the swelling lines of her 
bosom with an air of connoisseurship, while the Marquis de Chouard 
wagged his head involuntarily.  Muffat gazed at the carpet in order 
not to see any more.  At length Venus, with only her gauze veil over 
her shoulders, was ready to go on the stage.  Mme Jules, with 
vacant, unconcerned eyes and an expression suggestive of a little 
elderly wooden doll, still kept circling round her.  With brisk 
movements she took pins out of the inexhaustible pincushion over her 
heart and pinned up Venus' tunic, but as she ran over all those 
plump nude charms with her shriveled hands, nothing was suggested to 
her.  She was as one whom her sex does not concern.

"There!" said the young woman, taking a final look at herself in the 
mirror.

Bordenave was back again.  He was anxious and said the third act had 
begun.

"Very well!  I'm coming," replied Nana.  "Here's a pretty fuss!  
Why, it's usually I that waits for the others."

The gentlemen left the dressing room, but they did not say good-by, 
for the prince had expressed a desire to assist behind the scenes at 
the performance of the third act.  Left alone, Nana seemed greatly 
surprised and looked round her in all directions.

"Where can she be?" she queried.

She was searching for Satin.  When she had found her again, waiting 

Back to Full Books