[Several] Works by Emile Zola

dignity of his costume, she shook him, pinched him, shouted, "Oh, 
get along with ye, Chamberlain!" and ended by an accompaniment of 
swinging kicks behind.  Oh, those kicks!  How heartily she rained 
them on the Tuileries and the majesty of the imperial court, 
throning on high above an abject and trembling people.  That's what 
she thought of society!  That was her revenge!  It was an affair of 
unconscious hereditary spite; it had come to her in her blood.  Then 
when once the chamberlain was undressed and his coat lay spread on 
the ground she shrieked, "Jump!"  And he jumped.  She shrieked, 
"Spit!"  And he spat.  With a shriek she bade him walk on the gold, 
on the eagles, on the decorations, and he walked on them.  Hi tiddly 
hi ti!  Nothing was left; everything was going to pieces.  She 
smashed a chamberlain just as she smashed a flask or a comfit box, 
and she made filth of him, reduced him to a heap of mud at a street 
corner.

Meanwhile the goldsmiths had failed to keep their promise, and the 
bed was not delivered till one day about the middle of January.  
Muffat was just then in Normandy, whither he had gone to sell a last 
stray shred of property, but Nana demanded four thousand francs 
forthwith.  He was not due in Paris till the day after tomorrow, but 
when his business was once finished he hastened his return and 
without even paying a flying visit in the Rue Miromesnil came direct 
to the Avenue de Villiers.  Ten o'clock was striking.  As he had a 
key of a little door opening on the Rue Cardinet, he went up 
unhindered.  In the drawing room upstairs Zoe, who was polishing the 
bronzes, stood dumfounded at sight of him, and not knowing how to 
stop him, she began with much circumlocution, informing him that M. 
Venot, looking utterly beside himself, had been searching for him 
since yesterday and that he had already come twice to beg her to 
send Monsieur to his house if Monsieur arrived at Madame's before 
going home.  Muffat listened to her without in the least 
understanding the meaning of her recital; then he noticed her 
agitation and was seized by a sudden fit of jealousy of which he no 
longer believed himself capable.  He threw himself against the 
bedroom door, for he heard the sound of laughter within.  The door 
gave; its two flaps flew asunder, while Zoe withdrew, shrugging her 
shoulders.  So much the worse for Madame!  As Madame was bidding 
good-by to her wits, she might arrange matters for herself.

And on the threshold Muffat uttered a cry at the sight that was 
presented to his view.

"My God!  My God!"

The renovated bedroom was resplendent in all its royal luxury.  
Silver buttons gleamed like bright stars on the tea-rose velvet of 
the hangings.  These last were of that pink flesh tint which the 
skies assume on fine evenings, when Venus lights her fires on the 
horizon against the clear background of fading daylight.  The golden 
cords and tassels hanging in corners and the gold lace-work 
surrounding the panels were like little flames of ruddy strands of 
loosened hair, and they half covered the wide nakedness of the room 
while they emphasized its pale, voluptuous tone.  Then over against 
him there was the gold and silver bed, which shone in all the fresh 
splendor of its chiseled workmanship, a throne this of sufficient 
extent for Nana to display the outstretched glory of her naked 
limbs, an altar of Byzantine sumptuousness, worthy of the almighty 
puissance of Nana's sex, which at this very hour lay nudely 
displayed there in the religious immodesty befitting an idol of all 
men's worship.  And close by, beneath the snowy reflections of her 
bosom and amid the triumph of the goddess, lay wallowing a shameful, 
decrepit thing, a comic and lamentable ruin, the Marquis de Chouard 
in his nightshirt.

The count had clasped his hands together and, shaken by a paroxysmal 
shuddering, he kept crying:

"My God!  My God!"

It was for the Marquis de Chouard, then, that the golden roses 
flourished on the side panels, those bunches of golden roses 
blooming among the golden leaves; it was for him that the Cupids 
leaned forth with amorous, roguish laughter from their tumbling ring 
on the silver trelliswork.  And it was for him that the faun at his 
feet discovered the nymph sleeping, tired with dalliance, the figure 
of Night copied down to the exaggerated thighs--which caused her to 
be recognizable of all--from Nana's renowned nudity.  Cast there 
like the rag of something human which has been spoiled and dissolved 
by sixty years of debauchery, he suggested the charnelhouse amid the 
glory of the woman's dazzling contours.  Seeing the door open, he 
had risen up, smitten with sudden terror as became an infirm old 
man.  This last night of passion had rendered him imbecile; he was 
entering on his second childhood; and, his speech failing him, he 
remained in an attitude of flight, half-paralyzed, stammering, 
shivering, his nightshirt half up his skeleton shape, and one leg 
outside the clothes, a livid leg, covered with gray hair.  Despite 
her vexation Nana could not keep from laughing.

"Do lie down!  Stuff yourself into the bed," she said, pulling him 
back and burying him under the coverlet, as though he were some 
filthy thing she could not show anyone.

Then she sprang up to shut the door again.  She was decidedly never 
lucky with her little rough.  He was always coming when least 
wanted.  And why had he gone to fetch money in Normandy?  The old 
man had brought her the four thousand francs, and she had let him 
have his will of her.  She pushed back the two flaps of the door and 
shouted:

"So much the worse for you!  It's your fault.  Is that the way to 
come into a room?  I've had enough of this sort of thing.  Ta ta!"

Muffat remained standing before the closed door, thunderstruck by 
what he had just seen.  His shuddering fit increased.  It mounted 
from his feet to his heart and brain.  Then like a tree shaken by a 
mighty wind, he swayed to and fro and dropped on his knees, all his 
muscles giving way under him.  And with hands despairingly 
outstretched he stammered:

"This is more than I can bear, my God!  More than I can bear!"

He had accepted every situation but he could do so no longer.  He 
had come to the end of his strength and was plunged in the dark void 
where man and his reason are together overthrown.  In an extravagant 
access of faith he raised his hands ever higher and higher, 
searching for heaven, calling on God.

"Oh no, I do not desire it!  Oh, come to me, my God!  Succor me; 
nay, let me die sooner!  Oh no, not that man, my God!  It is over; 
take me, carry me away, that I may not see, that I may not feel any 
longer!  Oh, I belong to you, my God!  Our Father which art in 
heaven--"

And burning with faith, he continued his supplication, and an ardent 
prayer escaped from his lips.  But someone touched him on the 
shoulder.  He lifted his eyes; it was M. Venot.  He was surprised to 
find him praying before that closed door.  Then as though God 
Himself had responded to his appeal, the count flung his arms round 
the little old gentleman's neck.  At last he could weep, and he 
burst out sobbing and repeated:

"My brother, my brother."

All his suffering humanity found comfort in that cry.  He drenched 
M. Venot's face with tears; he kissed him, uttering fragmentary 
ejaculations.

"Oh, my brother, how I am suffering!  You only are left me, my 
brother.  Take me away forever--oh, for mercy's sake, take me away!"

Then M. Venot pressed him to his bosom and called him "brother" 
also.  But he had a fresh blow in store for him.  Since yesterday he 
had been searching for him in order to inform him that the Countess 
Sabine, in a supreme fit of moral aberration, had but now taken 
flight with the manager of one of the departments in a large, fancy 
emporium.  It was a fearful scandal, and all Paris was already 
talking about it.  Seeing him under the influence of such religious 
exaltation, Venot felt the opportunity to be favorable and at once 
told him of the meanly tragic shipwreck of his house.  The count was 
not touched thereby.  His wife had gone?  That meant nothing to him; 
they would see what would happen later on.  And again he was seized 
with anguish, and gazing with a look of terror at the door, the 
walls, the ceiling, he continued pouring forth his single 
supplication:

"Take me away!  I cannot bear it any longer!  Take me away!"

M. Venot took him away as though he had been a child.  From that day 
forth Muffat belonged to him entirely; he again became strictly 
attentive to the duties of religion; his life was utterly blasted.  
He had resigned his position as chamberlain out of respect for the 
outraged modesty of the Tuileries, and soon Estelle, his daughter, 
brought an action against him for the recovery of a sum of sixty 
thousand francs, a legacy left her by an aunt to which she ought to 
have succeeded at the time of her marriage.  Ruined and living 
narrowly on the remains of his great fortune, he let himself be 
gradually devoured by the countess, who ate up the husks Nana had 
rejected.  Sabine was indeed ruined by the example of promiscuity 
set her by her husband's intercourse with the wanton.  She was prone 
to every excess and proved the ultimate ruin and destruction of his 
very hearth.  After sundry adventures she had returned home, and he 
had taken her back in a spirit of Christian resignation and 
forgiveness.  She haunted him as his living disgrace, but he grew 
more and more indifferent and at last ceased suffering from these 
distresses.  Heaven took him out of his wife's hands in order to 
restore him to the arms of God, and so the voluptuous pleasures he 
had enjoyed with Nana were prolonged in religious ecstasies, 
accompanied by the old stammering utterances, the old prayers and 
despairs, the old fits of humility which befit an accursed creature 
who is crushed beneath the mire whence he sprang.  In the recesses 
of churches, his knees chilled by the pavement, he would once more 
experience the delights of the past, and his muscles would twitch, 
and his brain would whirl deliciously, and the satisfaction of the 
obscure necessities of his existence would be the same as of old.

On the evening of the final rupture Mignon presented himself at the 
house in the Avenue de Villiers.  He was growing accustomed to 
Fauchery and was beginning at last to find the presence of his 
wife's husband infinitely advantageous to him.  He would leave all 
the little household cares to the journalist and would trust him in 
the active superintendence of all their affairs.  Nay, he devoted 
the money gained by his dramatic successes to the daily expenditure 
of the family, and as, on his part, Fauchery behaved sensibly, 
avoiding ridiculous jealousy and proving not less pliant than Mignon 
himself whenever Rose found her opportunity, the mutual 
understanding between the two men constantly improved.  In fact, 
they were happy in a partnership which was so fertile in all kinds 
of amenities, and they settled down side by side and adopted a 
family arrangement which no longer proved a stumbling block.  The 
whole thing was conducted according to rule; it suited admirably, 
and each man vied with the other in his efforts for the common 
happiness.  That very evening Mignon had come by Fauchery's advice 
to see if he could not steal Nana's lady's maid from her, the 
journalist having formed a high opinion of the woman's extraordinary 
intelligence.  Rose was in despair; for a month past she had been 
falling into the hands of inexperienced girls who were causing her 
continual embarrassment.  When Zoe received him at the door he 
forthwith pushed her into the dining room.  But at his opening 
sentence she smiled.  The thing was impossible, she said, for she 
was leaving Madame and establishing herself on her own account.  And 
she added with an expression of discreet vanity that she was daily 
receiving offers, that the ladies were fighting for her and that Mme 
Blanche would give a pile of gold to have her back.

Zoe was taking the Tricon's establishment.  It was an old project 
and had been long brooded over.  It was her ambition to make her 
fortune thereby, and she was investing all her savings in it.  She 
was full of great ideas and meditated increasing the business and 
hiring a house and combining all the delights within its walls.  It 
was with this in view that she had tried to entice Satin, a little 
pig at that moment dying in hospital, so terribly had she done for 
herself.

Mignon still insisted with his offer and spoke of the risks run in 
the commercial life, but Zoe, without entering into explanations 
about the exact nature of her establishment, smiled a pinched smile, 
as though she had just put a sweetmeat in her mouth, and was content 
to remark:

"Oh, luxuries always pay.  You see, I've been with others quite long 
enough, and now I want others to be with me."

And a fierce look set her lip curling.  At last she would be 
"Madame," and for the sake of earning a few louis all those women 
whose slops she had emptied during the last fifteen years would 
prostrate themselves before her.

Mignon wished to be announced, and Zoe left him for a moment after 
remarking that Madame had passed a miserable day.  He had only been 
at the house once before, and he did not know it at all.  The dining 
room with its Gobelin tapestry, its sideboard and its plate filled 
him with astonishment.  He opened the doors familiarly and visited 
the drawing room and the winter garden, returning thence into the 
hall.  This overwhelming luxury, this gilded furniture, these silks 
and velvets, gradually filled him with such a feeling of admiration 
that it set his heart beating.  When Zoe came down to fetch him she 
offered to show him the other rooms, the dressing room, that is to 
say, and the bedroom.  In the latter Mignon's feelings overcame him; 
he was carried away by them; they filled him with tender enthusiasm.

That damned Nana was simply stupefying him, and yet he thought he 
knew a thing or two.  Amid the downfall of the house and the 
servants' wild, wasteful race to destruction, massed-up riches still 
filled every gaping hole and overtopped every ruined wall.  And 
Mignon, as he viewed this lordly monument of wealth, began recalling 
to mind the various great works he had seen.  Near Marseilles they 
had shown him an aqueduct, the stone arches of which bestrode an 
abyss, a Cyclopean work which cost millions of money and ten years 
of intense labor.  At Cherbourg he had seen the new harbor with its 
enormous works, where hundreds of men sweated in the sun while 
cranes filled the sea with huge squares of rock and built up a wall 
where a workman now and again remained crushed into bloody pulp.  
But all that now struck him as insignificant.  Nana excited him far 
more.  Viewing the fruit of her labors, he once more experienced the 
feelings of respect that had overcome him one festal evening in a 
sugar refiner's chateau.  This chateau had been erected for the 
refiner, and its palatial proportions and royal splendor had been 
paid for by a single material--sugar.  It was with something quite 
different, with a little laughable folly, a little delicate nudity--
it was with this shameful trifle, which is so powerful as to move 
the universe, that she alone, without workmen, without the 
inventions of engineers, had shaken Paris to its foundations and had 
built up a fortune on the bodies of dead men.

"Oh, by God, what an implement!"

Mignon let the words escape him in his ecstasy, for he felt a return 
of personal gratitude.

Nana had gradually lapsed into a most mournful condition.  To begin 
with, the meeting of the marquis and the count had given her a 
severe fit of feverish nervousness, which verged at times on 
laughter.  Then the thought of this old man going away half dead in 
a cab and of her poor rough, whom she would never set eyes on again 
now that she had driven him so wild, brought on what looked like the 
beginnings of melancholia.  After that she grew vexed to hear about 
Satin's illness.  The girl had disappeared about a fortnight ago and 
was now ready to die at Lariboisiere, to such a damnable state had 
Mme Robert reduced her.  When she ordered the horses to be put to in 
order that she might have a last sight of this vile little wretch 
Zoe had just quietly given her a week's notice.  The announcement 
drove her to desperation at once!  It seemed to her she was losing a 
member of her own family.  Great heavens!  What was to become of her 
when left alone?  And she besought Zoe to stay, and the latter, much 
flattered by Madame's despair, ended by kissing her to show that she 
was not going away in anger.  No, she had positively to go: the 
heart could have no voice in matters of business.

But that day was one of annoyances.  Nana was thoroughly disgusted 
and gave up the idea of going out.  She was dragging herself wearily 
about the little drawing room when Labordette came up to tell her of 
a splendid chance of buying magnificent lace and in the course of 
his remarks casually let slip the information that Georges was dead.  
The announcement froze her.

"Zizi dead!" she cried.

And involuntarily her eyes sought the pink stain on the carpet, but 
it had vanished at last; passing footsteps had worn it away.  
Meanwhile Labordette entered into particulars.  It was not exactly 
known how he died.  Some spoke of a wound reopening, others of 
suicide.  The lad had plunged, they said, into a tank at Les 
Fondettes.  Nana kept repeating:

"Dead!  Dead!"

She had been choking with grief since morning, and now she burst out 
sobbing and thus sought relief.  Hers was an infinite sorrow: it 
overwhelmed her with its depth and immensity.  Labordette wanted to 
comfort her as touching Georges, but she silenced him with a gesture 
and blurted out:

"It isn't only he; it's everything, everything.  I'm very wretched.  
Oh yes, I know!  They'll again be saying I'm a hussy.  To think of 
the mother mourning down there and of the poor man who was groaning 
in front of my door this morning and of all the other people that 
are now ruined after running through all they had with me!  That's 
it; punish Nana; punish the beastly thing!  Oh, I've got a broad 
back!  I can hear them as if I were actually there!  'That dirty 
wench who lies with everybody and cleans out some and drives others 
to death and causes a whole heap of people pain!'"

She was obliged to pause, for tears choked her utterance, and in her 
anguish she flung herself athwart a divan and buried her face in a 
cushion.  The miseries she felt to be around her, miseries of which 
she was the cause, overwhelmed her with a warm, continuous stream of 
self-pitying tears, and her voice failed as she uttered a little 
girl's broken plaint:

"Oh, I'm wretched!  Oh, I'm wretched!  I can't go on like this: it's 
choking me.  It's too hard to be misunderstood and to see them all 
siding against you because they're stronger.  However, when you've 
got nothing to reproach yourself with and your conscious is clear, 
why, then I say, 'I won't have it!  I won't have it!'"

In her anger she began rebeling against circumstances, and getting 
up, she dried her eyes, and walked about in much agitation.

"I won't have it!  They can say what they like, but it's not my 
fault!  Am I a bad lot, eh?  I give away all I've got; I wouldn't 
crush a fly!  It's they who are bad!  Yes, it's they!  I never 
wanted to be horrid to them.  And they came dangling after me, and 
today they're kicking the bucket and begging and going to ruin on 
purpose."

Then she paused in front of Labordette and tapped his shoulders.

"Look here," she said, "you were there all along; now speak the 
truth: did I urge them on?  Weren't there always a dozen of 'em 
squabbling who could invent the dirtiest trick?  They used to 
disgust me, they did!  I did all I knew not to copy them: I was 
afraid to.  Look here, I'll give you a single instance: they all 
wanted to marry me!  A pretty notion, eh?  Yes, dear boy, I could 
have been countess or baroness a dozen times over and more, if I'd 
consented.  Well now, I refused because I was reasonable.  Oh yes, I 
saved 'em some crimes and other foul acts!  They'd have stolen, 
murdered, killed father and mother.  I had only to say one word, and 
I didn't say it.  You see what I've got for it today.  There's 
Daguenet, for instance; I married that chap off!  I made a position 
for the beggarly fellow after keeping him gratis for weeks!  And I 
met him yesterday, and he looks the other way!  Oh, get along, you 
swine!  I'm less dirty than you!"

She had begun pacing about again, and now she brought her fist 
violently down on a round table.

"By God it isn't fair!  Society's all wrong.  They come down on the 
women when it's the men who want you to do things.  Yes, I can tell 
you this now: when I used to go with them--see?  I didn't enjoy it; 
no, I didn't enjoy it one bit.  It bored me, on my honor.  Well 
then, I ask you whether I've got anything to do with it!  Yes, they 
bored me to death!  If it hadn't been for them and what they made of 
me, dear boy, I should be in a convent saying my prayers to the good 
God, for I've always had my share of religion.  Dash it, after all, 
if they have dropped their money and their lives over it, what do I 
care?  It's their fault.  I've had nothing to do with it!"

"Certainly not," said Labordette with conviction.

Zoe ushered in Mignon, and Nana received him smilingly.  She had 
cried a good deal, but it was all over now.  Still glowing with 
enthusiasm, he complimented her on her installation, but she let him 
see that she had had enough of her mansion and that now she had 
other projects and would sell everything up one of these days.  Then 
as he excused himself for calling on the ground that he had come 
about a benefit performance in aid of old Bose, who was tied to his 
armchair by paralysis, she expressed extreme pity and took two 
boxes.  Meanwhile Zoe announced that the carriage was waiting for 
Madame, and she asked for her hat and as she tied the strings told 
them about poor, dear Satin's mishap, adding:

"I'm going to the hospital.  Nobody ever loved me as she did.  Oh, 
they're quite right when they accuse the men of heartlessness!  Who 
knows?  Perhaps I shan't see her alive.  Never mind, I shall ask to 
see her: I want to give her a kiss."

Labordette and Mignon smiled, and as Nana was no longer melancholy 
she smiled too.  Those two fellows didn't count; they could enter 
into her feelings.  And they both stood and admired her in silent 
abstraction while she finished buttoning her gloves.  She alone kept 
her feet amid the heaped-up riches of her mansion, while a whole 
generation of men lay stricken down before her.  Like those antique 
monsters whose redoubtable domains were covered with skeletons, she 
rested her feet on human skulls.  She was ringed round with 
catastrophes.  There was the furious immolation of Vandeuvres; the 
melancholy state of Foucarmont, who was lost in the China seas; the 
smashup of Steiner, who now had to live like an honest man; the 
satisfied idiocy of La Faloise, and the tragic shipwreck of the 
Muffats.  Finally there was the white corpse of Georges, over which 
Philippe was now watching, for he had come out of prison but 
yesterday.  She had finished her labor of ruin and death.  The fly 
that had flown up from the ordure of the slums, bringing with it the 
leaven of social rottenness, had poisoned all these men by merely 
alighting on them.  It was well done--it was just.  She had avenged 
the beggars and the wastrels from whose caste she issued.  And 
while, metaphorically speaking, her sex rose in a halo of glory and 
beamed over prostrate victims like a mounting sun shining brightly 
over a field of carnage, the actual woman remained as unconscious as 
a splendid animal, and in her ignorance of her mission was the good-
natured courtesan to the last.  She was still big; she was still 
plump; her health was excellent, her spirits capital.  But this went 
for nothing now, for her house struck her as ridiculous.  It was too 
small; it was full of furniture which got in her way.  It was a 
wretched business, and the long and the short of the matter was she 
would have to make a fresh start.  In fact, she was meditating 
something much better, and so she went off to kiss Satin for the 
last time.  She was in all her finery and looked clean and solid and 
as brand new as if she had never seen service before.



CHAPTER XIV


Nana suddenly disappeared.  It was a fresh plunge, an escapade, a 
flight into barbarous regions.  Before her departure she had treated 
herself to a new sensation: she had held a sale and had made a clean 
sweep of everything--house, furniture, jewelry, nay, even dresses 
and linen.  Prices were cited--the five days' sale produced more 
than six hundred thousand francs.  For the last time Paris had seen 
her in a fairy piece.  It was called Melusine, and it played at the 
Theatre de la Gaite, which the penniless Bordenave had taken out of 
sheer audacity.  Here she again found herself in company with 
Prulliere and Fontan.  Her part was simply spectacular, but it was 
the great attraction of the piece, consisting, as it did, of three 
POSES PLASTIQUES, each of which represented the same dumb and 
puissant fairy.  Then one fine morning amid his grand success, when 
Bordenave, who was mad after advertisement, kept firing the Parisian 
imagination with colossal posters, it became known that she must 
have started for Cairo the previous day.  She had simply had a few 
words with her manager.  Something had been said which did not 
please her; the whole thing was the caprice of a woman who is too 
rich to let herself be annoyed.  Besides, she had indulged an old 
infatuation, for she had long meditated visiting the Turks.

Months passed--she began to be forgotten.  When her name was 
mentioned among the ladies and gentlemen, the strangest stories were 
told, and everybody gave the most contradictory and at the same time 
prodigious information.  She had made a conquest of the viceroy; she 
was reigning, in the recesses of a palace, over two hundred slaves 
whose heads she now and then cut off for the sake of a little 
amusement.  No, not at all!  She had ruined herself with a great big 
nigger!  A filthy passion this, which had left her wallowing without 
a chemise to her back in the crapulous debauchery of Cairo.  A 
fortnight later much astonishment was produced when someone swore to 
having met her in Russia.  A legend began to be formed: she was the 
mistress of a prince, and her diamonds were mentioned.  All the 
women were soon acquainted with them from the current descriptions, 
but nobody could cite the precise source of all this information.  
There were finger rings, earrings, bracelets, a REVIERE of 
phenomenal width, a queenly diadem surmounted by a central brilliant 
the size of one's thumb.  In the retirement of those faraway 
countries she began to gleam forth as mysteriously as a gem-laden 
idol.  People now mentioned her without laughing, for they were full 
of meditative respect for this fortune acquired among the 
barbarians.

One evening in July toward eight o'clock, Lucy, while getting out of 
her carriage in the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honore, noticed Caroline 
Hequet, who had come out on foot to order something at a neighboring 
tradesman's.  Lucy called her and at once burst out with:

"Have you dined?  Are you disengaged?  Oh, then come with me, my 
dear.  Nana's back."

The other got in at once, and Lucy continued:

"And you know, my dear, she may be dead while we're gossiping."

"Dead!  What an idea!" cried Caroline in stupefaction.  "And where 
is she?  And what's it of?"

"At the Grand Hotel, of smallpox.  Oh, it's a long story!"

Lucy had bidden her coachman drive fast, and while the horses 
trotted rapidly along the Rue Royale and the boulevards, she told 
what had happened to Nana in jerky, breathless sentences.

"You can't imagine it.  Nana plumps down out of Russia.  I don't 
know why--some dispute with her prince.  She leaves her traps at the 
station; she lands at her aunt's--you remember the old thing.  Well, 
and then she finds her baby dying of smallpox.  The baby dies next 
day, and she has a row with the aunt about some money she ought to 
have sent, of which the other one has never seen a sou.  Seems the 
child died of that: in fact, it was neglected and badly cared for.  
Very well; Nana slopes, goes to a hotel, then meets Mignon just as 
she was thinking of her traps.  She has all sorts of queer feelings, 
shivers, wants to be sick, and Mignon takes her back to her place 
and promises to look after her affairs.  Isn't it odd, eh?  Doesn't 
it all happen pat?  But this is the best part of the story: Rose 
finds out about Nana's illness and gets indignant at the idea of her 
being alone in furnished apartments.  So she rushes off, crying, to 
look after her.  You remember how they used to detest one another--
like regular furies!  Well then, my dear, Rose has had Nana 
transported to the Grand Hotel, so that she should, at any rate, die 
in a smart place, and now she's already passed three nights there 
and is free to die of it after.  It's Labordette who told me all 
about it.  Accordingly I wanted to see for myself--"

"Yes, yes," interrupted Caroline in great excitement "We'll go up to 
her."

They had arrived at their destination.  On the boulevard the 
coachman had had to rein in his horses amid a block of carriages and 
people on foot.  During the day the Corps Legislatif had voted for 
war, and now a crowd was streaming down all the streets, flowing 
along all the pavements, invading the middle of the roadway.  Beyond 
the Madeleine the sun had set behind a blood-red cloud, which cast a 
reflection as of a great fire and set the lofty windows flaming.  
Twilight was falling, and the hour was oppressively melancholy, for 
now the avenues were darkening away into the distance but were not 
as yet dotted over by the bright sparks of the gas lamps.  And among 
the marching crowds distant voices swelled and grew ever louder, and 
eyes gleamed from pale faces, while a great spreading wind of 
anguish and stupor set every head whirling.

"Here's Mignon," said Lucy.  "He'll give us news."

Mignon was standing under the vast porch of the Grand Hotel.  He 
looked nervous and was gazing at the crowd.  After Lucy's first few 
questions he grew impatient and cried out:

"How should I know?  These last two days I haven't been able to tear 
Rose away from up there.  It's getting stupid, when all's said, for 
her to be risking her life like that!  She'll be charming if she 
gets over it, with holes in her face!  It'll suit us to a tee!"

The idea that Rose might lose her beauty was exasperating him.  He 
was giving up Nana in the most downright fashion, and he could not 
in the least understand these stupid feminine devotions.  But 
Fauchery was crossing the boulevard, and he, too, came up anxiously 
and asked for news.  The two men egged each other on.  They 
addressed one another familiarly in these days.

"Always the same business, my sonny," declared Mignon.  "You ought 
to go upstairs; you would force her to follow you."

"Come now, you're kind, you are!" said the journalist.  "Why don't 
you go upstairs yourself?"

Then as Lucy began asking for Nana's number, they besought her to 
make Rose come down; otherwise they would end by getting angry.

Nevertheless, Lucy and Caroline did not go up at once.  They had 
caught sight of Fontan strolling about with his hands in his pockets 
and greatly amused by the quaint expressions of the mob.  When he 
became aware that Nana was lying ill upstairs he affected sentiment 
and remarked:

"The poor girl!  I'll go and shake her by the hand.  What's the 
matter with her, eh?"

"Smallpox," replied Mignon.

The actor had already taken a step or two in the direction of the 
court, but he came back and simply murmured with a shiver:

"Oh, damn it!"

The smallpox was no joke.  Fontan had been near having it when he 
was five years old, while Mignon gave them an account of one of his 
nieces who had died of it.  As to Fauchery, he could speak of it 
from personal experience, for he still bore marks of it in the shape 
of three little lumps at the base of his nose, which he showed them.  
And when Mignon again egged him on to the ascent, on the pretext 
that you never had it twice, he violently combated this theory and 
with infinite abuse of the doctors instanced various cases.  But 
Lucy and Caroline interrupted them, for the growing multitude filled 
them with astonishment.

"Just look!  Just look what a lot of people!"  The night was 
deepening, and in the distance the gas lamps were being lit one by 
one.  Meanwhile interested spectators became visible at windows, 
while under the trees the human flood grew every minute more dense, 
till it ran in one enormous stream from the Madeleine to the 
Bastille.  Carriages rolled slowly along.  A roaring sound went up 
from this compact and as yet inarticulate mass.  Each member of it 
had come out, impelled by the desire to form a crowd, and was now 
trampling along, steeping himself in the pervading fever.  But a 
great movement caused the mob to flow asunder.  Among the jostling, 
scattering groups a band of men in workmen's caps and white blouses 
had come in sight, uttering a rhythmical cry which suggested the 
beat of hammers upon an anvil.

"To Ber-lin!  To Ber-lin!  To Ber-lin!"  And the crowd stared in 
gloomy distrust yet felt themselves already possessed and inspired 
by heroic imaginings, as though a military band were passing.

"Oh yes, go and get your throats cut!" muttered Mignon, overcome by 
an access of philosophy.

But Fontan thought it very fine, indeed, and spoke of enlisting.  
When the enemy was on the frontier all citizens ought to rise up in 
defense of the fatherland!  And with that he assumed an attitude 
suggestive of Bonaparte at Austerlitz.

"Look here, are you coining up with us?" Lucy asked him.

"Oh dear, no!  To catch something horrid?" he said.

On a bench in front of the Grand Hotel a man sat hiding his face in 
a handkerchief.  On arriving Fauchery had indicated him to Mignon 
with a wink of the eye.  Well, he was still there; yes, he was 
always there.  And the journalist detained the two women also in 
order to point him out to them.  When the man lifted his head they 
recognized him; an exclamation escaped them.  It was the Count 
Muffat, and he was giving an upward glance at one of the windows.

"You know, he's been waiting there since this morning," Mignon 
informed them.  "I saw him at six o'clock, and he hasn't moved 
since.  Directly Labordette spoke about it he came there with his 
handkerchief up to his face.  Every half-hour he comes dragging 
himself to where we're standing to ask if the person upstairs is 
doing better, and then he goes back and sits down.  Hang it, that 
room isn't healthy!  It's all very well being fond of people, but 
one doesn't want to kick the bucket."

The count sat with uplifted eyes and did not seem conscious of what 
was going on around him.  Doubtless he was ignorant of the 
declaration of war, and he neither felt nor saw the crowd.

"Look, here he comes!" said Fauchery.  "Now you'll see."

The count had, in fact, quitted his bench and was entering the lofty 
porch.  But the porter, who was getting to know his face at last, 
did not give him time to put his question.  He said sharply:

"She's dead, monsieur, this very minute."

Nana dead!  It was a blow to them all.  Without a word Muffat had 
gone back to the bench, his face still buried in his handkerchief.  
The others burst into exclamations, but they were cut short, for a 
fresh band passed by, howling, "A BERLIN!  A BERLIN!  A BERLIN!"  
Nana dead!  Hang it, and such a fine girl too!  Mignon sighed and 
looked relieved, for at last Rose would come down.  A chill fell on 
the company.  Fontan, meditating a tragic role, had assumed a look 
of woe and was drawing down the corners of his mouth and rolling his 
eyes askance, while Fauchery chewed his cigar nervously, for despite 
his cheap journalistic chaff he was really touched.  Nevertheless, 
the two women continued to give vent to their feelings of surprise.  
The last time Lucy had seen her was at the Gaite; Blanche, too, had 
seen her in Melusine.  Oh, how stunning it was, my dear, when she 
appeared in the depths of the crystal grot!  The gentlemen 
remembered the occasion perfectly.  Fontan had played the Prince 
Cocorico.  And their memories once stirred up, they launched into 
interminable particulars.  How ripping she looked with that rich 
coloring of hers in the crystal grot!  Didn't she, now?  She didn't 
say a word: the authors had even deprived her of a line or two, 
because it was superfluous.  No, never a word!  It was grander that 
way, and she drove her public wild by simply showing herself.  You 
wouldn't find another body like hers!  Such shoulders as she had, 
and such legs and such a figure!  Strange that she should be dead!  
You know, above her tights she had nothing on but a golden girdle 
which hardly concealed her behind and in front.  All round her the 
grotto, which was entirely of glass, shone like day.  Cascades of 
diamonds were flowing down; strings of brilliant pearls glistened 
among the stalactites in the vault overhead, and amid the 
transparent atmosphere and flowing fountain water, which was crossed 
by a wide ray of electric light, she gleamed like the sun with that 
flamelike skin and hair of hers.  Paris would always picture her 
thus--would see her shining high up among crystal glass like the 
good God Himself.  No, it was too stupid to let herself die under 
such conditions!  She must be looking pretty by this time in that 
room up there!

"And what a lot of pleasures bloody well wasted!" said Mignon in 
melancholy tones, as became a man who did not like to see good and 
useful things lost.

He sounded Lucy and Caroline in order to find out if they were going 
up after all.  Of course they were going up; their curiosity had 
increased.  Just then Blanche arrived, out of breath and much 
exasperated at the way the crowds were blocking the pavement, and 
when she heard the news there was a fresh outburst of exclamations, 
and with a great rustling of skirts the ladies moved toward the 
staircase.  Mignon followed them, crying out:

"Tell Rose that I'm waiting for her.  She'll come at once, eh?"

"They do not exactly know whether the contagion is to be feared at 
the beginning or near the end," Fontan was explaining to Fauchery.  
"A medical I know was assuring me that the hours immediately 
following death are particularly dangerous.  There are miasmatic 
exhalations then.  Ah, but I do regret this sudden ending; I should 
have been so glad to shake hands with her for the last time.

"What good would it do you now?" said the journalist.

"Yes, what good?" the two others repeated.

The crowd was still on the increase.  In the bright light thrown 
from shop-windows and beneath the wavering glare of the gas two 
living streams were distinguishable as they flowed along the 
pavement, innumerable hats apparently drifting on their surface.  At 
that hour the popular fever was gaining ground rapidly, and people 
were flinging themselves in the wake of the bands of men in blouses.  
A constant forward movement seemed to sweep the roadway, and the cry 
kept recurring; obstinately, abruptly, there rang from thousands of 
throats:

"A BERLIN!  A BERLIN!  A BERLIN!"

The room on the fourth floor upstairs cost twelve francs a day, 
since Rose had wanted something decent and yet not luxurious, for 
sumptuousness is not necessary when one is suffering.  Hung with 
Louis XIII cretonne, which was adorned with a pattern of large 
flowers, the room was furnished with the mahogany commonly found in 
hotels.  On the floor there was a red carpet variegated with black 
foliage.  Heavy silence reigned save for an occasional whispering 
sound caused by voices in the corridor.

"I assure you we're lost.  The waiter told us to turn to the right.  
What a barrack of a house!"

"Wait a bit; we must have a look.  Room number 401; room number 
401!"

"Oh, it's this way: 405, 403.  We ought to be there.  Ah, at last, 
401!  This way!  Hush now, hush!"

The voices were silent.  Then there was a slight coughing and a 
moment or so of mental preparation.  Then the door opened slowly, 
and Lucy entered, followed by Caroline and Blanche.  But they 
stopped directly; there were already five women in the room; Gaga 
was lying back in the solitary armchair, which was a red velvet 
Voltaire.  In front of the fireplace Simonne and Clarisse were now 
standing talking to Lea de Horn, who was seated, while by the bed, 
to the left of the door, Rose Mignon, perched on the edge of a 
chest, sat gazing fixedly at the body where it lay hidden in the 
shadow of the curtains.  All the others had their hats and gloves on 
and looked as if they were paying a call: she alone sat there with 
bare hands and untidy hair and cheeks rendered pale by three nights 
of watching.  She felt stupid in the face of this sudden death, and 
her eyes were swollen with weeping.  A shaded lamp standing on the 
corner of the chest of drawers threw a bright flood of light over 
Gaga.

"What a sad misfortune, is it not?" whispered Lucy as she shook 
hands with Rose.  "We wanted to bid her good-by."

And she turned round and tried to catch sight of her, but the lamp 
was too far off, and she did not dare bring it nearer.  On the bed 
lay stretched a gray mass, but only the ruddy chignon was 
distinguishable and a pale blotch which might be the face.  Lucy 
added:

"I never saw her since that time at the Gaite, when she was at the 
end of the grotto."

At this Rose awoke from her stupor and smiled as she said:

"Ah, she's changed; she's changed."

Then she once more lapsed into contemplation and neither moved nor 
spoke.  Perhaps they would be able to look at her presently!  And 
with that the three women joined the others in front of the 
fireplace.  Simonne and Clarisse were discussing the dead woman's 
diamonds in low tones.  Well, did they really exist--those diamonds?  
Nobody had seen them; it must be a bit of humbug.  But Lea de Horn 
knew someone who knew all about them.  Oh, they were monster stones!  
Besides, they weren't all; she had brought back lots of other 
precious property from Russia--embroidered stuffs, for instance, 
valuable knickknacks, a gold dinner service, nay, even furniture.  
"Yes, my dear, fifty-two boxes, enormous cases some of them, three 
truckloads of them!"  They were all lying at the station.  "Wasn't 
it hard lines, eh?--to die without even having time to unpack one's 
traps?"  Then she had a lot of tin, besides--something like a 
million!  Lucy asked who was going to inherit it all.  Oh, distant 
relations--the aunt, without doubt!  It would be a pretty surprise 
for that old body.  She knew nothing about it yet, for the sick 
woman had obstinately refused to let them warn her, for she still 
owed her a grudge over her little boy's death.  Thereupon they were 
all moved to pity about the little boy, and they remembered seeing 
him at the races.  Oh, it was a wretchedly sickly baby; it looked so 
old and so sad.  In fact, it was one of those poor brats who never 
asked to be born!

"He's happier under the ground," said Blanche.

"Bah, and so's she!" added Caroline.  "Life isn't so funny!"

In that gloomy room melancholy ideas began to take possession of 
their imaginations.  They felt frightened.  It was silly to stand 
talking so long, but a longing to see her kept them rooted to the 
spot.  It was very hot--the lamp glass threw a round, moonlike patch 
of light upon the ceiling, but the rest of the room was drowned in 
steamy darkness.  Under the bed a deep plate full of phenol exhaled 
an insipid smell.  And every few moments tiny gusts of wind swelled 
the window curtains.  The window opened on the boulevard, whence 
rose a dull roaring sound.

"Did she suffer much?" asked Lucy, who was absorbed in contemplation 
of the clock, the design of which represented the three Graces as 
nude young women, smiling like opera dancers.

Gaga seemed to wake up.

"My word, yes!  I was present when she died.  I promise you it was 
not at all pleasant to see.  Why, she was taken with a shuddering 
fit--"

But she was unable to proceed with her explanation, for a cry arose 
outside:

"A BERLIN!  A BERLIN!  A BERLIN!"

And Lucy, who felt suffocated, flung wide the window and leaned upon 
the sill.  It was pleasant there; the air came fresh from the starry 
sky.  Opposite her the windows were all aglow with light, and the 
gas sent dancing reflections over the gilt lettering of the shop 
signs.

Beneath these, again, a most amusing scene presented itself.  The 
streams of people were discernible rolling torrentwise along the 
sidewalks and in the roadway, where there was a confused procession 
of carriages.  Everywhere there were vast moving shadows in which 
lanterns and lampposts gleamed like sparks.  But the band which now 
came roaring by carried torches, and a red glow streamed down from 
the direction of the Madeleine, crossed the mob like a trail of fire 
and spread out over the heads in the distance like a vivid 
reflection of a burning house.  Lucy called Blanche and Caroline, 
forgetting where she was and shouting:

"Do come!  You get a capital view from this window!"

They all three leaned out, greatly interested.  The trees got in 
their way, and occasionally the torches disappeared under the 
foliage.  They tried to catch a glimpse of the men of their own 
party below, but a protruding balcony hid the door, and they could 
only make out Count Muffat, who looked like a dark parcel thrown 
down on the bench where he sat.  He was still burying his face in 
his handkerchief.  A carriage had stopped in front, and yet another 
woman hurried up, in whom Lucy recognized Maria Blond.  She was not 
alone; a stout man got down after her.

"It's that thief of a Steiner," said Caroline.  "How is it they 
haven't sent him back to Cologne yet?  I want to see how he looks 
when he comes in."

They turned round, but when after the lapse of ten minutes Maria 
Blond appeared, she was alone.  She had twice mistaken the 
staircase.  And when Lucy, in some astonishment, questioned her:

"What, he?" she said.  "My dear, don't you go fancying that he'll 
come upstairs!  It's a great wonder he's escorted me as far as the 
door.  There are nearly a dozen of them smoking cigars."

As a matter of fact, all the gentlemen were meeting downstairs.  
They had come strolling thither in order to have a look at the 
boulevards, and they hailed one another and commented loudly on that 
poor girl's death.  Then they began discussing politics and 
strategy.  Bordenave, Daguenet, Labordette, Prulliere and others, 
besides, had swollen the group, and now they were all listening to 
Fontan, who was explaining his plan for taking Berlin within a week.

Meanwhile Maria Blond was touched as she stood by the bedside and 
murmured, as the others had done before her:

"Poor pet!  The last time I saw her was in the grotto at the Gaite."

"Ah, she's changed; she's changed!"  Rose Mignon repeated with a 
smile of gloomiest dejection.

Two more women arrived.  These were Tatan Nene and Louise Violaine.  
They had been wandering about the Grand Hotel for twenty minutes 
past, bandied from waiter to waiter, and had ascended and descended 
more than thirty flights of stairs amid a perfect stampede of 
travelers who were hurrying to leave Paris amid the panic caused by 
the war and the excitement on the boulevards.  Accordingly they just 
dropped down on chairs when they came in, for they were too tired to 
think about the dead.  At that moment a loud noise came from the 
room next door, where people were pushing trunks about and striking 
against furniture to an accompaniment of strident, outlandish 
syllables.  It was a young Austrian couple, and Gaga told how during 
her agony the neighbors had played a game of catch as catch can and 
how, as only an unused door divided the two rooms, they had heard 
them laughing and kissing when one or the other was caught.

"Come, it's time we were off," said Clarisse.  "We shan't bring her 
to life again.  Are you coming, Simonne?"

They all looked at the bed out of the corners of their eyes, but 
they did not budge an inch.  Nevertheless, they began getting ready 
and gave their skirts various little pats.  Lucy was again leaning 
out of window.  She was alone now, and a sorrowful feeling began 
little by little to overpower her, as though an intense wave of 
melancholy had mounted up from the howling mob.  Torches still kept 
passing, shaking out clouds of sparks, and far away in the distance 
the various bands stretched into the shadows, surging unquietly to 
and fro like flocks being driven to the slaughterhouse at night.  A 
dizzy feeling emanated from these confused masses as the human flood 
rolled them along--a dizzy feeling, a sense of terror and all the 
pity of the massacres to come.  The people were going wild; their 
voices broke; they were drunk with a fever of excitement which sent 
them rushing toward the unknown "out there" beyond the dark wall of 
the horizon.

"A BERLIN!  A BERLIN!  A BERLIN!"

Lucy turned round.  She leaned her back against the window, and her 
face was very pale.

"Good God!  What's to become of us?"

The ladies shook their heads.  They were serious and very anxious 
about the turn events were taking.

"For my part," said Caroline Hequet in her decisive way, "I start 
for London the day after tomorrow.  Mamma's already over there 
getting a house ready for me.  I'm certainly not going to let myself 
be massacred in Paris."

Her mother, as became a prudent woman, had invested all her 
daughters' money in foreign lands.  One never knows how a war may 
end!  But Maria Blond grew vexed at this.  She was a patriot and 
spoke of following the army.

"There's a coward for you!  Yes, if they wanted me I should put on 
man's clothes just to have a good shot at those pigs of Prussians!  
And if we all die after?  What of that?  Our wretched skins aren't 
so valuable!"

Blanche de Sivry was exasperated.

"Please don't speak ill of the Prussians!  They are just like other 
men, and they're not always running after the women, like your 
Frenchmen.  They've just expelled the little Prussian who was with 
me.  He was an awfully rich fellow and so gentle: he couldn't have 
hurt a soul.  It's disgraceful; I'm ruined by it.  And, you know, 
you mustn't say a word or I go and find him out in Germany!"

After that, while the two were at loggerheads, Gaga began murmuring 
in dolorous tones:

"It's all over with me; my luck's always bad.  It's only a week ago 
that I finished paying for my little house at Juvisy.  Ah, God knows 
what trouble it cost me!  I had to go to Lili for help!  And now 
here's the war declared, and the Prussians'll come and they'll burn 
everything.  How am I to begin again at my time of life, I should 
like to know?"

"Bah!" said Clarisse.  "I don't care a damn about it.  I shall 
always find what I want."

"Certainly you will," added Simonne.  "It'll be a joke.  Perhaps, 
after all, it'll be good biz."

And her smile hinted what she thought.  Tatan Nene and Louise 
Violaine were of her opinion.  The former told them that she had 
enjoyed the most roaring jolly good times with soldiers.  Oh, they 
were good fellows and would have done any mortal thing for the 
girls.  But as the ladies had raised their voices unduly Rose 
Mignon, still sitting on the chest by the bed, silenced them with a 
softly whispered "Hush!"  They stood quite still at this and glanced 
obliquely toward the dead woman, as though this request for silence 
had emanated from the very shadows of the curtains.  In the heavy, 
peaceful stillness which ensued, a void, deathly stillness which 
made them conscious of the stiff dead body lying stretched close by 
them, the cries of the mob burst forth:

"A BERLIN!  A BERLIN!  A BERLIN!"

But soon they forgot.  Lea de Horn, who had a political salon where 
former ministers of Louis Philippe were wont to indulge in delicate 
epigrams, shrugged her shoulders and continued the conversation in a 
low tone:

"What a mistake this war is!  What a bloodthirsty piece of 
stupidity!"

At this Lucy forthwith took up the cudgels for the empire.  She had 
been the mistress of a prince of the imperial house, and its defense 
became a point of family honor with her.

"Do leave them alone, my dear.  We couldn't let ourselves be further 
insulted!  Why, this war concerns the honor of France.  Oh, you know 
I don't say that because of the prince.  He WAS just mean!  Just 
imagine, at night when he was going to bed he hid his gold in his 
boots, and when we played at bezique he used beans, because one day 
I pounced down on the stakes for fun.  But that doesn't prevent my 
being fair.  The emperor was right."

Lea shook her head with an air of superiority, as became a woman who 
was repeating the opinions of important personages.  Then raising 
her voice:

"This is the end of all things.  They're out of their minds at the 
Tuileries.  France ought to have driven them out yesterday.  Don't 
you see?"

They all violently interrupted her.  What was up with her?  Was she 
mad about the emperor?  Were people not happy?  Was business doing 
badly?  Paris would never enjoy itself so thoroughly again.

Gaga was beside herself; she woke up and was very indignant.

"Be quiet!  It's idiotic!  You don't know what you're saying.  I--
I've seen Louis Philippe's reign: it was full of beggars and misers, 
my dear.  And then came '48!  Oh, it was a pretty disgusting 
business was their republic!  After February I was simply dying of 
starvation--yes, I, Gaga.  Oh, if only you'd been through it all you 
would go down on your knees before the emperor, for he's been a 
father to us; yes, a father to us."

She had to be soothed but continued with pious fervor:

"O my God, do Thy best to give the emperor the victory.  Preserve 
the empire to us!"

They all repeated this aspiration, and Blanche confessed that she 
burned candles for the emperor.  Caroline had been smitten by him 
and for two whole months had walked where he was likely to pass but 
had failed to attract his attention.  And with that the others burst 
forth into furious denunciations of the Republicans and talked of 
exterminating them on the frontiers so that Napoleon III, after 
having beaten the enemy, might reign peacefully amid universal 
enjoyment.

"That dirty Bismarck--there's another cad for you!" Maria Blond 
remarked.

"To think that I should have known him!" cried Simonne.  "If only I 
could have foreseen, I'm the one that would have put some poison in 
his glass."

But Blanche, on whose heart the expulsion of her Prussian still 
weighed, ventured to defend Bismarck.  Perhaps he wasn't such a bad 
sort.  To every man his trade!

"You know," she added, "he adores women."

"What the hell has that got to do with us?" said Clarisse.  "We 
don't want to cuddle him, eh?"

"There's always too many men of that sort!" declared Louise Violaine 
gravely.  "It's better to do without 'em than to mix oneself up with 
such monsters!"

And the discussion continued, and they stripped Bismarck, and, in 
her Bonapartist zeal, each of them gave him a sounding kick, while 
Tatan Nene kept saying:

"Bismarck!  Why, they've simply driven me crazy with the chap!  Oh, 
I hate him!  I didn't know that there Bismarck!  One can't know 
everybody."

"Never mind," said Lea de Horn by way of conclusion, "that Bismarck 
will give us a jolly good threshing."

But she could not continue.  The ladies were all down on her at 
once.  Eh, what?  A threshing?  It was Bismarck they were going to 
escort home with blows from the butt ends of their muskets.  What 
was this bad Frenchwoman going to say next?

"Hush," whispered Rose, for so much noise hurt her.

The cold influence of the corpse once more overcame them, and they 
all paused together.  They were embarrassed; the dead woman was 
before them again; a dull thread of coming ill possessed them.  On 
the boulevard the cry was passing, hoarse and wild:

"A BERLIN!  A BERLIN!  A BERLIN!"

Presently, when they were making up their minds to go, a voice was 
heard calling from the passage:

"Rose!  Rose!"

Gaga opened the door in astonishment and disappeared for a moment.  
When she returned:

"My dear," she said, "it's Fauchery.  He's out there at the end of 
the corridor.  He won't come any further, and he's beside himself 
because you still stay near that body."

Mignon had at last succeeded in urging the journalist upstairs.  
Lucy, who was still at the window, leaned out and caught sight of 
the gentlemen out on the pavement.  They were looking up, making 
energetic signals to her.  Mignon was shaking his fists in 
exasperation, and Steiner, Fontan, Bordenave and the rest were 
stretching out their arms with looks of anxious reproach, while 
Daguenet simply stood smoking a cigar with his hands behind his 
back, so as not to compromise himself.

"It's true, dear," said Lucy, leaving the window open; "I promised 
to make you come down.  They're all calling us now."

Rose slowly and painfully left the chest.

"I'm coming down; I'm coming down," she whispered.  "It's very 
certain she no longer needs me.  They're going to send in a Sister 
of Mercy."

And she turned round, searching for her hat and shawl.  Mechanically 
she filled a basin of water on the toilet table and while washing 
her hands and face continued:

"I don't know!  It's been a great blow to me.  We used scarcely to 
be nice to one another.  Ah well!  You see I'm quite silly over it 
now.  Oh! I've got all sorts of strange ideas--I want to die myself--
I feel the end of the world's coming.  Yes, I need air."

The corpse was beginning to poison the atmosphere of the room.  And 
after long heedlessness there ensued a panic.

"Let's be off; let's be off, my little pets!" Gaga kept saying.  "It 
isn't wholesome here."

They went briskly out, casting a last glance at the bed as they 
passed it.  But while Lucy, Blanche and Caroline still remained 
behind, Rose gave a final look round, for she wanted to leave the 
room in order.  She drew a curtain across the window, and then it 
occurred to her that the lamp was not the proper thing and that a 
taper should take its place.  So she lit one of the copper 
candelabra on the chimney piece and placed it on the night table 
beside the corpse.  A brilliant light suddenly illumined the dead 
woman's face.  The women were horror-struck.  They shuddered and 
escaped.

"Ah, she's changed; she's changed!" murmured Rose Mignon, who was 
the last to remain.

She went away; she shut the door.  Nana was left alone with upturned 
face in the light cast by the candle.  She was fruit of the charnel 
house, a heap of matter and blood, a shovelful of corrupted flesh 
thrown down on the pillow.  The pustules had invaded the whole of 
the face, so that each touched its neighbor.  Fading and sunken, 
they had assumed the grayish hue of mud; and on that formless pulp, 
where the features had ceased to be traceable, they already 
resembled some decaying damp from the grave.  One eye, the left eye, 
had completely foundered among bubbling purulence, and the other, 
which remained half open, looked like a deep, black, ruinous hole.  
The nose was still suppurating.  Quite a reddish crush was peeling 
from one of the cheeks and invading the mouth, which it distorted 
into a horrible grin.  And over this loathsome and grotesque mask of 
death the hair, the beautiful hair, still blazed like sunlight and 
flowed downward in rippling gold.  Venus was rotting.  It seemed as 
though the poison she had assimilated in the gutters and on the 
carrion tolerated by the roadside, the leaven with which she had 
poisoned a whole people, had but now remounted to her face and 
turned it to corruption.

The room was empty.  A great despairing breath came up from the 
boulevard and swelled the curtain.

"A BERLIN!  A BERLIN!  A BERLIN!"






THE MILLER'S DAUGHTER



CHAPTER I

THE BETROTHAL


Pere Merlier's mill, one beautiful summer evening, was arranged for 
a grand fete.  In the courtyard were three tables, placed end to 
end, which awaited the guests.  Everyone knew that Francoise, 
Merlier's daughter, was that night to be betrothed to Dominique, a 
young man who was accused of idleness but whom the fair sex for 
three leagues around gazed at with sparkling eyes, such a fine 
appearance had he.

Pere Merlier's mill was pleasing to look upon.  It stood exactly in 
the center of Rocreuse, where the highway made an elbow.  The 
village had but one street, with two rows of huts, a row on each 
side of the road; but at the elbow meadows spread out, and huge 
trees which lined the banks of the Morelle covered the extremity of 
the valley with lordly shade.  There was not, in all Lorraine, a 
corner of nature more adorable.  To the right and to the left thick 
woods, centenarian forests, towered up from gentle slopes, filling 
the horizon with a sea of verdure, while toward the south the plain 
stretched away, of marvelous fertility, displaying as far as the eye 
could reach patches of ground divided by green hedges.  But what 
constituted the special charm of Rocreuse was the coolness of that 
cut of verdure in the most sultry days of July and August.  The 
Morelle descended from the forests of Gagny and seemed to have 
gathered the cold from the foliage beneath which it flowed for 
leagues; it brought with it the murmuring sounds, the icy and 
concentrated shade of the woods.  And it was not the sole source of 
coolness: all sorts of flowing streams gurgled through the forest; 
at each step springs bubbled up; one felt, on following the narrow 
pathways, that there must exist subterranean lakes which pierced 
through beneath the moss and availed themselves of the smallest 
crevices at the feet of trees or between the rocks to burst forth in 
crystalline fountains.  The whispering voices of these brooks were 
so numerous and so loud that they drowned the song of the 
bullfinches.  It was like some enchanted park with cascades falling 
from every portion.

Below the meadows were damp.  Gigantic chestnut trees cast dark 
shadows.  On the borders of the meadows long hedges of poplars 
exhibited in lines their rustling branches.  Two avenues of enormous 
plane trees stretched across the fields toward the ancient Chateau 
de Gagny, then a mass of ruins.  In this constantly watered district 
the grass grew to an extraordinary height.  It resembled a garden 
between two wooded hills, a natural garden, of which the meadows 
were the lawns, the giant trees marking the colossal flower beds.  
When the sun's rays at noon poured straight downward the shadows 
assumed a bluish tint; scorched grass slept in the heat, while an 
icy shiver passed beneath the foliage.

And there it was that Pere Merlier's mill enlivened with its 
ticktack a corner of wild verdure.  The structure, built of plaster 
and planks, seemed as old as the world.  It dipped partially in the 
Morelle, which rounded at that point into a transparent basin.  A 
sluice had been made, and the water fell from a height of several 
meters upon the mill wheel, which cracked as it turned, with the 
asthmatic cough of a faithful servant grown old in the house.  When 
Pere Merlier was advised to change it he shook his head, saying that 
a new wheel would be lazier and would not so well understand the 
work, and he mended the old one with whatever he could put his hands 
on: cask staves, rusty iron, zinc and lead.  The wheel appeared 
gayer than ever for it, with its profile grown odd, all plumed with 
grass and moss.  When the water beat upon it with its silvery flood 
it was covered with pearls; its strange carcass wore a sparkling 
attire of necklaces of mother-of-pearl.

The part of the mill which dipped in the Morelle had the air of a 
barbaric arch stranded there.  A full half of the structure was 
built on piles.  The water flowed beneath the floor, and deep places 
were there, renowned throughout the district for the enormous eels 
and crayfish caught in them.  Below the fall the basin was as clear 
as a mirror, and when the wheel did not cover it with foam schools 
of huge fish could be seen swimming with the slowness of a squadron.  
Broken steps led down to the river near a stake to which a boat was 
moored.  A wooden gallery passed above the wheel.  Windows opened, 
pierced irregularly.  It was a pell-mell of corners, of little 
walls, of constructions added too late, of beams and of roofs, which 
gave the mill the aspect of an old, dismantled citadel.  But ivy had 
grown; all sorts of clinging plants stopped the too-wide chinks and 
threw a green cloak over the ancient building.  The young ladies who 
passed by sketched Pere Merlier's mill in their albums.

On the side facing the highway the structure was more solid.  A 
stone gateway opened upon the wide courtyard, which was bordered to 
the right and to the left by sheds and stables.  Beside a well an 
immense elm covered half the courtyard with its shadow.  In the 
background the building displayed the four windows of its second 
story, surmounted by a pigeon house.  Pere Merlier's sole vanity was 
to have this front plastered every ten years.  It had just received 
a new coating and dazzled the village when the sun shone on it at 
noon.

For twenty years Pere Merlier had been mayor of Rocreuse.  He was 
esteemed for the fortune he had acquired.  His wealth was estimated 
at something like eighty thousand francs, amassed sou by sou.  When 
he married Madeleine Guillard, who brought him the mill as her 
dowry, he possessed only his two arms.  But Madeleine never repented 
of her choice, so briskly did he manage the business.  Now his wife 
was dead, and he remained a widower with his daughter Francoise.  
Certainly he might have rested, allowed the mill wheel to slumber in 
the moss, but that would have been too dull for him, and in his eyes 
the building would have seemed dead.  He toiled on for pleasure.

Pere Merlier was a tall old man with a long, still face, who never 
laughed but who possessed, notwithstanding, a very gay heart.  He 
had been chosen mayor because of his money and also on account of 
the imposing air he could assume during a marriage ceremony.

Francoise Merlier was just eighteen.  She did not pass for one of 
the handsome girls of the district, as she was not robust.  Up to 
her fifteenth year she had been even ugly.

The Rocreuse people had not been able to understand why the daughter 
of Pere and Mere Merlier, both of whom had always enjoyed excellent 
health, grew ill and with an air of regret.  But at fifteen, though 
yet delicate, her little face became one of the prettiest in the 
world.  She had black hair, black eyes, and was as rosy as a peach; 
her lips constantly wore a smile; there were dimples in her cheeks, 
and her fair forehead seemed crowned with sunlight.  Although not 
considered robust in the district, she was far from thin; the idea 
was simply that she could not lift a sack of grain, but she would 
become plump as she grew older--she would eventually be as round and 
dainty as a quail.  Her father's long periods of silence had made 
her thoughtful very young.  If she smiled constantly it was to 
please others.  By nature she was serious.

Of course all the young men of the district paid court to her, more 
on account of her ecus than her pretty ways.  At last she made a 
choice which scandalized the community.

On the opposite bank of the Morelle lived a tall youth named 
Dominique Penquer.  He did not belong to Rocreuse.  Ten years before 
he had arrived from Belgium as the heir of his uncle, who had left 
him a small property upon the very border of the forest of Gagny, 
just opposite the mill, a few gunshots distant.  He had come to sell 
this property, he said, and return home.  But the district charmed 
him, it appeared, for he did not quit it.  He was seen cultivating 
his little field, gathering a few vegetables upon which he 
subsisted.  He fished and hunted; many times the forest guards 
nearly caught him and were on the point of drawing up proces-verbaux 
against him.  This free existence, the resources of which the 
peasants could not clearly discover, at length gave him a bad 
reputation.  He was vaguely styled a poacher.  At any rate, he was 
lazy, for he was often found asleep on the grass when he should have 
been at work.  The hut he inhabited beneath the last trees on the 
edge of the forest did not seem at all like the dwelling of an 
honest young fellow.  If he had had dealings with the wolves of the 
ruins of Gagny the old women would not have been the least bit 
surprised.  Nevertheless, the young girls sometimes risked defending 
him, for this doubtful man was superb; supple and tall as a poplar, 
he had a very white skin, with flaxen hair and beard which gleamed 
like gold in the sun.

One fine morning Francoise declared to Pere Merlier that she loved 
Dominique and would never wed any other man.

It may well be imagined what a blow this was to Pere Merlier.  He 
said nothing, according to his custom, but his face grew thoughtful 
and his internal gaiety no longer sparkled in his eyes.  He looked 
gruff for a week.  Francoise also was exceedingly grave.  What 
tormented Pere Merlier was to find out how this rogue of a poacher 
had managed to fascinate his daughter.  Dominique had never visited 
the mill.  The miller watched and saw the gallant on the other side 
of the Morelle, stretched out upon the grass and feigning to be 
asleep.  Francoise could see him from her chamber window.  
Everything was plain: they had fallen in love by casting sheep's 
eyes at each other over the mill wheel.

Another week went by.  Francoise became more and more grave.  Pere 
Merlier still said nothing.  Then one evening he himself silently 
brought in Dominique.  Francoise at that moment was setting the 
table.  She did not seem astonished; she contented herself with 
putting on an additional plate, knife and fork, but the little 
dimples were again seen in her cheeks, and her smile reappeared.  
That morning Pere Merlier had sought out Dominique in his hut on the 
border of the wood.

There the two men had talked for three hours with doors and windows 
closed.  What was the purport of their conversation no one ever 
knew.  Certain it was, however, that Pere Merlier, on taking his 
departure, already called Dominique his son-in-law.  Without doubt 
the old man had found the youth he had gone to seek a worthy youth 
in the lazy fellow who stretched himself out upon the grass to make 
the girls fall in love with him.

All Rocreuse clamored.  The women at the doors had plenty to say on 
the subject of the folly of Pere Merlier, who had thus introduced a 
reprobate into his house.  The miller let people talk on.  Perhaps 
he remembered his own marriage.  He was without a sou when he wedded 
Madeleine and her mill; this, however, had not prevented him from 
making a good husband.  Besides, Dominique cut short the gossip by 
going so vigorously to work that all the district was amazed.  The 
miller's assistant had just been drawn to serve as a soldier, and 
Dominique would not suffer another to be engaged.  He carried the 
sacks, drove the cart, fought with the old mill wheel when it 
refused to turn, and all this with such good will that people came 
to see him out of curiosity.  Pere Merlier had his silent laugh.  He 
was excessively proud of having formed a correct estimate of this 
youth.  There is nothing like love to give courage to young folks.  
Amid all these heavy labors Francoise and Dominique adored each 
other.  They did not indulge in lovers' talks, but there was a 
smiling gentleness in their glances.

Up to that time Pere Merlier had not spoken a single word on the 
subject of marriage, and they respected this silence, awaiting the 
old man's will.  Finally one day toward the middle of July he caused 
three tables to be placed in the courtyard, beneath the great elm, 
and invited his friends of Rocreuse to come in the evening and drink 
a glass of wine with him.

When the courtyard was full and all had their glasses in their 
hands, Pere Merlier raised his very high and said:

"I have the pleasure to announce to you that Francoise will wed this 
young fellow here in a month, on Saint Louis's Day."

Then they drank noisily.  Everybody smiled.  But Pere Merlier, again 
lifting his voice, exclaimed:

"Dominique, embrace your fiancee.  It is your right."

They embraced, blushing to the tips of their ears, while all the 
guests laughed joyously.  It was a genuine fete.  They emptied a 
small cask of wine.  Then when all were gone but intimate friends 
the conversation was carried on without noise.  The night had 
fallen, a starry and cloudless night.  Dominique and Francoise, 
seated side by side on a bench, said nothing.

An old peasant spoke of the war the emperor had declared against 
Prussia.  All the village lads had already departed.  On the 
preceding day troops had again passed through the place.  There was 
going to be hard fighting.

"Bah!" said Pere Merlier with the selfishness of a happy man.  
"Dominique is a foreigner; he will not go to the war.  And if the 
Prussians come here he will be on hand to defend his wife!"

The idea that the Prussians might come there seemed a good joke.  
They were going to receive a sound whipping, and the affair would 
soon be over.

"I have afready seen them; I have already seen them," repeated the 
old peasant in a hollow voice.

There was silence.  Then they drank again.  Francoise and Dominique 
had heard nothing; they had gently taken each other by the hand 
behind the bench, so that nobody could see them, and it seemed so 
delightful that they remained where they were, their eyes plunged 
into the depths of the shadows.

What a warm and superb night it was!  The village slumbered on both 
edges of the white highway in infantile quietude.  From time to time 
was heard the crowing of some chanticleer aroused too soon.  From 
the huge wood near by came long breaths, which passed over the roofs 
like caresses.  The meadows, with their dark shadows, assumed a 
mysterious and dreamy majesty, while all the springs, all the 
flowing waters which gurgled in the darkness, seemed to be the cool 
and rhythmical respiration of the sleeping country.  Occasionally 
the ancient mill wheel, lost in a doze, appeared to dream like those 
old watchdogs that bark while snoring; it cracked; it talked to 
itself, rocked by the fall of the Morelle, the surface of which gave 
forth the musical and continuous sound of an organ pipe.  Never had 
more profound peace descended upon a happier corner of nature.



CHAPTER II

THE ATTACK ON THE MILL


A month later, on the day preceding that of Saint Louis, Rocreuse 
was in a state of terror.  The Prussians had beaten the emperor and 
were advancing by forced marches toward the village.  For a week 
past people who hurried along the highway had been announcing them 
thus: "They are at Lormiere--they are at Novelles!"  And on hearing 
that they were drawing near so rapidly, Rocreuse every morning 
expected to see them descend from the wood of Gagny.  They did not 
come, however, and that increased the fright.  They would surely 
fall upon the village during the night and slaughter everybody.

That morning, a little before sunrise, there was an alarm.  The 
inhabitants were awakened by the loud tramp of men on the highway.  
The women were already on their knees, making the sign of the cross, 
when some of the people, peering cautiously through the partially 
opened windows, recognized the red pantaloons.  It was a French 
detachment.  The captain immediately asked for the mayor of the 
district and remained at the mill after having talked with Pere 
Merlier.

The sun rose gaily that morning.  It would be hot at noon.  Over the 
wood floated a golden brightness, while in the distance white vapors 
arose from the meadows.  The neat and pretty village awoke amid the 
fresh air, and the country, with its river and its springs, had the 
moist sweetness of a bouquet.  But that beautiful day caused nobody 
to smile.  The captain was seen to take a turn around the mill, 
examine the neighboring houses, pass to the other side of the 
Morelle and from there study the district with a field glass; Pere 
Merlier, who accompanied him, seemed to be giving him explanations.  
Then the captain posted soldiers behind the walls, behind the trees 
and in the ditches.  The main body of the detachment encamped in the 
courtyard of the mill.  Was there going to be a battle?  When Pere 
Merlier returned he was questioned.  He nodded his head without 
speaking.  Yes, there was going to be a battle!

Francoise and Dominique were in the courtyard; they looked at him.  
At last he took his pipe from his mouth and said:

"Ah, my poor young ones, you cannot get married tomorrow!"

Dominique, his lips pressed together, with an angry frown on his 
forehead, at times raised himself on tiptoe and fixed his eyes upon 
the wood of Gagny, as if he wished to see the Prussians arrive.  
Francoise, very pale and serious, came and went, furnishing the 
soldiers with what they needed.  The troops were making soup in a 
corner of the courtyard; they joked while waiting for it to get 
ready.

The captain was delighted.  He had visited the chambers and the huge 
hall of the mill which looked out upon the river.  Now, seated 
beside the well, he was conversing with Pere Merlier.

"Your mill is a real fortress," he said.  "We can hold it without 
difficulty until evening.  The bandits are late.  They ought to be 
here."

The miller was grave.  He saw his mill burning like a torch, but he 
uttered no complaint, thinking such a course useless.  He merely 
said:

"You had better hide the boat behind the wheel; there is a place 
there just fit for that purpose.  Perhaps it will be useful to have 
the boat."

The captain gave the requisite order.  This officer was a handsome 
man of forty; he was tall and had an amiable countenance.  The sight 
of Francoise and Dominique seemed to please him.  He contemplated 
them as if he had forgotten the coming struggle.  He followed 
Francoise with his eyes, and his look told plainly that he thought 
her charming.  Then turning toward Dominique, he asked suddenly:

"Why are you not in the army, my good fellow?"

"I am a foreigner," answered the young man.

The captain evidently did not attach much weight to this reason.  He 
winked his eye and smiled.  Francoise was more agreeable company 
than a cannon.  On seeing him smile, Dominique added:

"I am a foreigner, but I can put a ball in an apple at five hundred 
meters.  There is my hunting gun behind you."

"You may have use for it," responded the captain dryly.

Francoise had approached, somewhat agitated.  Without heeding the 
strangers present Dominique took and grasped in his the two hands 
she extended to him, as if to put herself under his protection.  The 
captain smiled again but said not a word.  He remained seated, his 
sword across his knees and his eyes plunged into space, lost in a 
reverie.

It was already ten o'clock.  The heat had become very great.  A 
heavy silence prevailed.  In the courtyard, in the shadows of the 
sheds, the soldiers had begun to eat their soup.  Not a sound came 
from the village; all its inhabitants had barricaded the doors and 
windows of their houses.  A dog, alone upon the highway, howled.  
From the neighboring forests and meadows, swooning in the heat, came 
a prolonged and distant voice made up of all the scattered breaths.  
A cuckoo sang.  Then the silence grew more intense.

Suddenly in that slumbering air a shot was heard.  The captain 
leaped briskly to his feet; the soldiers left their plates of soup, 
yet half full.  In a few seconds everybody was at the post of duty; 
from bottom to top the mill was occupied.  Meanwhile the captain, 
who had gone out upon the road, had discovered nothing; to the right 
and to the left the highway stretched out, empty and white.  A 
second shot was heard, and still nothing visible, not even a shadow.  
But as he was returning the captain perceived in the direction of 
Gagny, between two trees, a light puff of smoke whirling away like 
thistledown.  The wood was calm and peaceful.

"The bandits have thrown themselves into the forest," he muttered.  
"They know we are here."

Then the firing continued, growing more and more vigorous, between 
the French soldiers posted around the mill and the Prussians hidden 
behind the trees.  The balls whistled above the Morelle without 
damaging either side.  The fusillade was irregular, the shots coming 
from every bush, and still only the little puffs of smoke, tossed 
gently by the breeze, were seen.  This lasted nearly two hours.  The 
officer hummed a tune with an air of indifference.  Francoise and 
Dominique, who had remained in the courtyard, raised themselves on 
tiptoe and looked over a low wall.  They were particularly 
interested in a little soldier posted on the shore of the Morelle, 
behind the remains of an old bateau; he stretched himself out flat 
on the ground, watched, fired and then glided into a ditch a trifle 
farther back to reload his gun; and his movements were so droll, so 
tricky and so supple, that they smiled as they looked at him.  He 
must have perceived the head of a Prussian, for he arose quickly and 
brought his weapon to his shoulder, but before he could fire he 
uttered a cry, fell and rolled into the ditch, where for an instant 
his legs twitched convulsively like the claws of a chicken just 
killed.  The little soldier had received a ball full in the breast.  
He was the first man slain.  Instinctively Francoise seized 
Dominique's hand and clasped it with a nervous contraction.

"Move away," said the captain.  "You are within range of the balls."

At that moment a sharp little thud was heard in the old elm, and a 
fragment of a branch came whirling down.  But the two young folks 
did not stir; they were nailed to the spot by anxiety to see what 
was going on.  On the edge of the wood a Prussian had suddenly come 
out from behind a tree as from a theater stage entrance, beating the 
air with his hands and falling backward.  Nothing further moved; the 
two corpses seemed asleep in the broad sunlight; not a living soul 
was seen in the scorching country.  Even the crack of the fusillade 
had ceased.  The Morelle alone whispered in its clear tones.

Pere Merlier looked at the captain with an air of surprise, as if to 
ask him if the struggle was over.

"They are getting ready for something worse," muttered the officer.  
"Don't trust appearances.  Move away from there."

He had not finished speaking when there was a terrible discharge of 
musketry.  The great elm was riddled, and a host of leaves shot into 
the air.  The Prussians had happily fired too high.  Dominique 
dragged, almost carried, Francoise away, while Pere Merlier followed 
them, shouting:

"Go down into the cellar; the walls are solid!"

But they did not heed him; they entered the huge hall where ten 
soldiers were waiting in silence, watching through the chinks in the 
closed window shutters.  The captain was alone in the courtyard, 
crouching behind the little wall, while the furious discharges 
continued.  Without, the soldiers he had posted gave ground only 
foot by foot.  However, they re-entered one by one, crawling, when 
the enemy had dislodged them from their hiding places.  Their orders 
were to gain time and not show themselves, that the Prussians might 
remain in ignorance as to what force was before them.  Another hour 
went by.  As a sergeant arrived, saying that but two or three more 
men remained without, the captain glanced at his watch, muttering:

"Half-past two o'clock.  We must hold the position four hours 
longer."

He caused the great gate of the courtyard to be closed, and every 
preparation was made for an energetic resistance.  As the Prussians 
were on the opposite side of the Morelle, an immediate assault was 
not to be feared.  There was a bridge two kilometers away, but they 
evidently were not aware of its existence, and it was hardly likely 
that they would attempt to ford the river.  The officer, therefore, 
simply ordered the highway to be watched.  Every effort would be 
made in the direction of the country.

Again the fusillade had ceased.  The mill seemed dead beneath the 
glowing sun.  Not a shutter was open; no sound came from the 
interior.  At length, little by little, the Prussians showed 
themselves at the edge of the forest of Gagny.  They stretched their 
necks and grew bold.  In the mill several soldiers had already 
raised their guns to their shoulders, but the captain cried:

"No, no; wait.  Let them come nearer."

They were exceedingly prudent, gazing at the mill with a suspicious 
air.  The silent and somber old structure with its curtains of ivy 
filled them with uneasiness.  Nevertheless, they advanced.  When 
fifty of them were in the opposite meadow the officer uttered the 
single word:

"Fire!"

A crash was heard; isolated shots followed.  Francoise, all of a 
tremble, had mechanically put her hands to her ears.  Dominique, 
behind the soldiers, looked on; when the smoke had somewhat lifted 
he saw three Prussians stretched upon their backs in the center of 
the meadow.  The others had thrown themselves behind the willows and 
poplars.  Then the siege began.

For more than an hour the mill was riddled with balls.  They dashed 
against the old walls like hail.  When they struck the stones they 
were heard to flatten and fall into the water.  They buried 
themselves in the wood with a hollow sound.  Occasionally a sharp 
crack announced that the mill wheel had been hit.  The soldiers in 
the interior were careful of their shots; they fired only when they 
could take aim.  From time to time the captain consulted his watch.  
As a ball broke a shutter and plowed into the ceiling he said to 
himself:

"Four o'clock.  We shall never be able to hold out!"

Little by little the terrible fusillade weakened the old mill.  A 
shutter fell into the water, pierced like a bit of lace, and it was 
necessary to replace it with a mattress.  Pere Merlier constantly 
exposed himself to ascertain the extent of the damage done to his 
poor wheel, the cracking of which made his heart ache.  All would be 
over with it this time; never could he repair it.  Dominique had 
implored Francoise to withdraw, but she refused to leave him; she 
was seated behind a huge oaken clothespress, which protected her.  A 
ball, however, struck the clothespress, the sides of which gave 
forth a hollow sound.  Then Dominique placed himself in front of 
Francoise.  He had not yet fired a shot; he held his gun in his hand 
but was unable to approach the windows, which were altogether 
occupied by the soldiers.  At each discharge the floor shook.

"Attention!  Attention!" suddenly cried the captain.

He had just seen a great dark mass emerge from the wood.  
Immediately a formidable platoon fire opened.  It was like a 
waterspout passing over the mill.  Another shutter was shattered, 
and through the gaping opening of the window the balls entered.  Two 
soldiers rolled upon the floor.  One of them lay like a stone; they 
pushed the body against the wall because it was in the way.  The 
other twisted in agony, begging his comrades to finish him, but they 
paid no attention to him.  The balls entered in a constant stream; 
each man took care of himself and strove to find a loophole through 
which to return the fire.  A third soldier was hit; he uttered not a 
word; he fell on the edge of a table, with eyes fixed and haggard.  
Opposite these dead men Francoise, stricken with horror, had 
mechanically pushed away her chair to sit on the floor against the 
wall; she thought she would take up less room there and not be in so 
much danger.  Meanwhile the soldiers had collected all the 
mattresses of the household and partially stopped up the windows 
with them.  The hall was filled with wrecks, with broken weapons and 
demolished furniture.

"Five o'clock," said the captain.  "Keep up your courige!  They are 
about to try to cross the river!"

At that moment Francoise uttered a cry.  A ball which had ricocheted 
had grazed her forehead.  Several drops of blood appeared.  
Dominique stared at her; then, approaching the window, he fired his 
first shot.  Once started, he did not stop.  He loaded and fired 
without heeding what was passing around him, but from time to time 
he glanced at Francoise.  He was very deliberate and aimed with 
care.  The Prussians, keeping beside the poplars, attempted the 
passage of the Morelle, as the captain had predicted, but as soon as 
a man strove to cross he fell, shot in the head by Dominique.  The 
captain, who had his eyes on the young man, was amazed.  He 
complimented him, saying that he should be glad to have many such 
skillful marksmen.  Dominique did not hear him.  A ball cut his 
shoulder; another wounded his arm, but he continued to fire.

There were two more dead men.  The mangled mattresses no longer 
stopped the windows.  The last discharge seemed as if it would have 
carried away the mill.  The position had ceased to be tenable.  
Nevertheless, the captain said firmly:

"Hold your ground for half an hour more!"

Now he counted the minutes.  He had promised his chiefs to hold the 
enemy in check there until evening, and he would not give an inch 
before the hour he had fixed on for the retreat.  He preserved his 
amiable air and smiled upon Francoise to reassure her.  He had 
picked up the gun of a dead soldier and himself was firing.

Only four soldiers remained in the hall.  The Prussians appeared in 
a body on the other side of the Morelle, and it was clear that they 
intended speedily to cross the river.  A few minutes more elapsed.  
The stubborn captain would not order the retreat.  Just then a 
sergeant hastened to him and said:

"They are upon the highway; they will take us in the rear!"

The Prussians must have found the bridge.  The captain pulled out 
his watch and looked at it.

"Five minutes longer," he said.  "They cannot get here before that 
time!"

Then at six o'clock exactly he at last consented to lead his men out 
through a little door which opened into a lane.  From there they 
threw themselves into a ditch; they gained the forest of Sauval.  
Before taking his departure the captain bowed very politely to Pere 
Merlier and made his excuses, adding:

"Amuse them!  We will return!"

Dominique was now alone in the hall.  He was still firing, hearing 
nothing, understanding nothing.  He felt only the need of defending 
Francoise.  He had not the least suspicion in the world that the 
soldiers had retreated.  He aimed and killed his man at every shot.  
Suddenly there was a loud noise.  The Prussians had entered the 
courtyard from behind.  Dominique fired a last; shot, and they fell 
upon him while his gun was yet smoking.

Four men held him.  Others vociferated around him in a frightful 
language.  They were ready to slaughter him on the spot.  Francoise, 
with a supplicating look, had cast herself before him.  But an 
officer entered and ordered the prisoner to be delivered up to him.  
After exchanging a few words in German with the soldiers he turned 
toward Dominique and said to him roughly in very good French:

"You will be shot in two hours!"



CHAPTER III

THE FLIGHT


It was a settled rule of the German staff that every Frenchman, not 
belonging to the regular army, taken with arms in his hands should 
be shot.  The militia companies themselves were not recognized as 
belligerents.  By thus making terrible examples of the peasants who 
defended their homes, the Germans hoped to prevent the levy en 
masse, which they feared.

The officer, a tall, lean man of fifty, briefly questioned 
Dominique.  Although he spoke remarkably pure French he had a 
stiffness altogether Prussian.

"Do you belong to this district?" he asked.

"No; I am a Belgian," answered the young man.

"Why then did you take up arms?  The fighting did not concern you!"

Dominique made no reply.  At that moment the officer saw Francoise 
who was standing by, very pale, listening; upon her white forehead 
her slight wound had put a red bar.  He looked at the young folks, 
one after the other, seemed to understand matters and contented 
himself with adding:

"You do not deny having fired, do you?"

"I fired as often as I could!" responded Dominique tranquilly.

This confession was useless, for he was black with powder, covered 
with sweat and stained with a few drops of blood which had flowed 
from the scratch on his shoulder.

"Very well," said the officer.  "You will be shot in two hours!"

Francoise did not cry out.  She clasped her hands and raised them 
with a gesture of mute despair.  The officer noticed this gesture.  
Two soldiers had taken Dominique to a neighboring apartment, where 
they were to keep watch over him.  The young girl had fallen upon a 
chair, totally overcome; she could not weep; she was suffocating.  
The officer had continued to examine her.  At last he spoke to her.

"Is that young man your brother?" he demanded.

She shook her head negatively.  The German stood stiffly on his feet 
with out a smile.  Then after a short silence he again asked:

"Has he lived long in the district?"

She nodded affirmatively.

"In that case, he ought to be thoroughly acquainted with the 
neighboring forests."

This time she spoke.

"He is thoroughly acquainted with them, monsieur," she said, looking 
at him with considerable surprise.

He said nothing further to her but turned upon his heel, demanding 
that the mayor of the village should be brought to him.  But 
Francoise had arisen with a slight blush on her countenance; 
thinking that she had seized the aim of the officer's questions, she 
had recovered hope.  She herself ran to find her father.

Pere Merlier, as soon as the firing had ceased, had quickly 
descended to the wooden gallery to examine his wheel.  He adored his 
daughter; he had a solid friendship for Dominique, his future son-
in-law, but his wheel also held a large place in his heart.  Since 
the two young ones, as he called them, had come safe and sound out 
of the fight, he thought of his other tenderness, which had suffered 
greatly.  Bent over the huge wooden carcass, he was studying its 
wounds with a sad air.  Five buckets were shattered to pieces; the 
central framework was riddled.  He thrust his fingers in the bullet 
holes to measure their depth; he thought how he could repair all 
these injuries.  Francoise found him already stopping up the clefts 
with rubbish and moss.

"Father," she said, "you are wanted."

And she wept at last as she told him what she had just heard.  Pere 
Merlier tossed his head.  People were not shot in such a summary 
fashion.  The matter must be looked after.  He re-entered the mill 
with his silent and tranquil air.  When the officer demanded of him 
provisions for his men he replied that the inhabitants of Rocreuse 
were not accustomed to be treated roughly and that nothing would be 
obtained from them if violence were employed.  He would see to 
everything but on condition that he was not interfered with.  The 
officer at first seemed irritated by his calm tone; then he gave way 
before the old man's short and clear words.  He even called him back 
and asked him:

"What is the name of that wood opposite?"

"The forest of Sauval."

"What is its extent?"

The miller looked at him fixedly.

"I do not know," he answered.

And he went away.  An hour later the contribution of war in 
provisions and money, demanded by the officer, was in the courtyard 
of the mill.  Night came on.  Francoise watched with anxiety the 
movements of the soldiers.  She hung about the room in which 
Dominique was imprisoned.  Toward seven o'clock she experienced a 
poignant emotion.  She saw the officer enter the prisoner's 
apartment and for a quarter of an hour heard their voices in loud 
conversation.  For an instant the officer reappeared upon the 
threshold to give an order in German, which she did not understand, 
but when twelve men ranged themselves in the courtyard, their guns 
on their shoulders, she trembled and felt as if about to faint.  All 
then was over: the execution was going to take place.  The twelve 
men stood there ten minutes, Dominique's voice continuing to be 
raised in a tone of violent refusal.  Finally the officer came out, 
saying, as he roughly shut the door:

"Very well; reflect.  I give you until tomorrow morning.'

And with a gesture he ordered the twelve men to break ranks.  
Francoise was stupefied.  Pere Merlier, who had been smoking his 
pipe and looking at the platoon simply with an air of curiosity, 
took her by the arm with paternal gentleness.  He led her to her 
chamber.

"Be calm," he said, "and try to sleep.  Tomorrow, when it is light, 
we will see what can be done."

As he withdrew he prudently locked her in.  It was his opinion that 
women were good for nothing and that they spoiled everything when 
they took a hand in a serious affair.  But Francoise did not retire.  
She sat for a long while upon the side of her bed, listening to the 
noises of the house.  The German soldiers encamped in the courtyard 
sang and laughed; they must have been eating and drinking until 
eleven o'clock, for the racket did not cease an instant.  In the 
mill itself heavy footsteps resounded from time to time, without 
doubt those of the sentinels who were being relieved.  But she was 
interested most by the sounds she could distinguish in the apartment 
beneath her chamber.  Many times she stretched herself out at full 
length and put her ear to the floor.  That apartment was the one in 
which Dominique was confined.  He must have been walking back and 
forth from the window to the wall, for she long heard the regular 
cadence of his steps.  Then deep silence ensued; he had doubtless 
seated himself.  Finally every noise ceased and all was as if 
asleep.  When slumber appeared to her to have settled on the house 
she opened her window as gently as possible and leaned her elbows on 
the sill.

Without, the night had a warm serenity.  The slender crescent of the 
moon, which was sinking behind the forest of Sauval, lit up the 
country with the glimmer of a night lamp.  The lengthened shadows of 
the tall trees barred the meadows with black, while the grass in 
uncovered spots assumed the softness of greenish velvet.  But 
Francoise did not pause to admire the mysterious charms of the 
night.  She examined the country, searching for the sentinels whom 
the Germans had posted obliquely.  She clearly saw their shadows 
extending like the rounds of a ladder along the Morelle.  Only one 
was before the mill, on the other shore of the river, beside a 
willow, the branches of which dipped in the water.  Francoise saw 
him plainly.  He was a tall man and was standing motionless, his 
face turned toward the sky with the dreamy air of a shepherd.

When she had carefully inspected the locality she again seated 
herself on her bed.  She remained there an hour, deeply absorbed.  
Then she listened once more: there was not a sound in the mill.  She 
returned to the window and glanced out, but doubtless one of the 
horns of the moon, which was still visible behind the trees, made 
her uneasy, for she resumed her waiting attitude.  At last she 
thought the proper time had come.  The night was as black as jet; 
she could no longer see the sentinel opposite; the country spread 
out like a pool of ink.  She strained her ear for an instant and 
made her decision.  Passing near the window was an iron ladder, the 
bars fastened to the wall, which mounted from the wheel to the 
garret and formerly enabled the millers to reach certain machinery; 
afterward the mechanism had been altered, and for a long while the 
ladder had been hidden under the thick ivy which covered that side 
of the mill.

Francoise bravely climbed out of her window and grasped one of the 
bars of the ladder.  She began to descend.  Her skirts embarrassed 
her greatly.  Suddenly a stone was detached from the wall and fell 
into the Morelle with a loud splash.  She stopped with an icy shiver 
of fear.  Then she realized that the waterfall with its continuous 
roar would drown every noise she might make, and she descended more 
courageously, feeling the ivy with her foot, assuring herself that 
the rounds were firm.  When she was at the height of the chamber 
which served as Dominique's prison she paused.  An unforeseen 
difficulty nearly caused her to lose all her courage: the window of 
the chamber was not directly below that of her apartment.  She hung 
off from the ladder, but when she stretched out her arm her hand 
encountered only the wall.  Must she, then, ascend without pushing 
her plan to completion?  Her arms were fatigued; the murmur of the 
Morelle beneath her commenced to make her dizzy.  Then she tore from 
the wall little fragments of plaster and threw them against 
Dominique's window.  He did not hear; he was doubtless asleep.  She 
crumbled more plaster from the wall, scraping the skin off her 
fingers.  She was utterly exhausted; she felt herself falling 
backward, when Dominique at last softly opened the window.

"It is I!" she murmured.  "Catch me quickly; I'm falling!"

It was the first time that she had addressed him familiarly.  
Leaning out, he seized her and drew her into the chamber.  There she 
gave vent to a flood of tears, stifling her sobs that she might not 
be heard.  Then by a supreme effort she calmed herself.

"Are you guarded?" she asked in a low voice.

Dominique, still stupefied at seeing her thus, nodded his head 

Back to Full Books