Across The PlainsbyRobert Louis Stevenson

[1880]



CHAPTER III - FONTAINEBLEAU - VILLAGE COMMUNITIES OF PAINTERS



I


THE charm of Fontainebleau is a thing apart.  It is a place that 
people love even more than they admire.  The vigorous forest air, 
the silence, the majestic avenues of highway, the wilderness of 
tumbled boulders, the great age and dignity of certain groves - 
these are but ingredients, they are not the secret of the philtre.  
The place is sanative; the air, the light, the perfumes, and the 
shapes of things concord in happy harmony.  The artist may be idle 
and not fear the "blues."  He may dally with his life.  Mirth, 
lyric mirth, and a vivacious classical contentment are of the very 
essence of the better kind of art; and these, in that most smiling 
forest, he has the chance to learn or to remember.  Even on the 
plain of Biere, where the Angelus of Millet still tolls upon the 
ear of fancy, a larger air, a higher heaven, something ancient and 
healthy in the face of nature, purify the mind alike from dulness 
and hysteria.  There is no place where the young are more gladly 
conscious of their youth, or the old better contented with their 
age.

The fact of its great and special beauty further recommends this 
country to the artist.  The field was chosen by men in whose blood 
there still raced some of the gleeful or solemn exultation of great 
art - Millet who loved dignity like Michelangelo, Rousseau whose 
modern brush was dipped in the glamour of the ancients.  It was 
chosen before the day of that strange turn in the history of art, 
of which we now perceive the culmination in impressionistic tales 
and pictures - that voluntary aversion of the eye from all 
speciously strong and beautiful effects - that disinterested love 
of dulness which has set so many Peter Bells to paint the river-
side primrose.  It was then chosen for its proximity to Paris.  And 
for the same cause, and by the force of tradition, the painter of 
to-day continues to inhabit and to paint it.  There is in France 
scenery incomparable for romance and harmony.  Provence, and the 
valley of the Rhone from Vienne to Tarascon, are one succession of 
masterpieces waiting for the brush.  The beauty is not merely 
beauty; it tells, besides, a tale to the imagination, and surprises 
while it charms.  Here you shall see castellated towns that would 
befit the scenery of dreamland; streets that glow with colour like 
cathedral windows; hills of the most exquisite proportions; flowers 
of every precious colour, growing thick like grass.  All these, by 
the grace of railway travel, are brought to the very door of the 
modern painter; yet he does not seek them; he remains faithful to 
Fontainebleau, to the eternal bridge of Gretz, to the watering-pot 
cascade in Cernay valley.  Even Fontainebleau was chosen for him; 
even in Fontainebleau he shrinks from what is sharply charactered.  
But one thing, at least, is certain, whatever he may choose to 
paint and in whatever manner, it is good for the artist to dwell 
among graceful shapes.  Fontainebleau, if it be but quiet scenery, 
is classically graceful; and though the student may look for 
different qualities, this quality, silently present, will educate 
his hand and eye.

But, before all its other advantages - charm, loveliness, or 
proximity to Paris - comes the great fact that it is already 
colonised.  The institution of a painters' colony is a work of time 
and tact.  The population must be conquered.  The innkeeper has to 
be taught, and he soon learns, the lesson of unlimited credit; he 
must be taught to welcome as a favoured guest a young gentleman in 
a very greasy coat, and with little baggage beyond a box of colours 
and a canvas; and he must learn to preserve his faith in customers 
who will eat heartily and drink of the best, borrow money to buy 
tobacco, and perhaps not pay a stiver for a year.  A colour 
merchant has next to be attracted.  A certain vogue must be given 
to the place, lest the painter, most gregarious of animals, should 
find himself alone.  And no sooner are these first difficulties 
overcome, than fresh perils spring up upon the other side; and the 
bourgeois and the tourist are knocking at the gate.  This is the 
crucial moment for the colony.  If these intruders gain a footing, 
they not only banish freedom and amenity; pretty soon, by means of 
their long purses, they will have undone the education of the 
innkeeper; prices will rise and credit shorten; and the poor 
painter must fare farther on and find another hamlet.  "Not here, O 
Apollo!" will become his song.  Thus Trouville and, the other day, 
St. Raphael were lost to the arts.  Curious and not always edifying 
are the shifts that the French student uses to defend his lair; 
like the cuttlefish, he must sometimes blacken the waters of his 
chosen pool; but at such a time and for so practical a purpose Mrs. 
Grundy must allow him licence.  Where his own purse and credit are 
not threatened, he will do the honours of his village generously.  
Any artist is made welcome, through whatever medium he may seek 
expression; science is respected; even the idler, if he prove, as 
he so rarely does, a gentleman, will soon begin to find himself at 
home.  And when that essentially modern creature, the English or 
American girl-student, began to walk calmly into his favourite inns 
as if into a drawing-room at home, the French painter owned himself 
defenceless; he submitted or he fled.  His French respectability, 
quite as precise as ours, though covering different provinces of 
life, recoiled aghast before the innovation.  But the girls were 
painters; there was nothing to be done; and Barbizon, when I last 
saw it and for the time at least, was practically ceded to the fair 
invader.  Paterfamilias, on the other hand, the common tourist, the 
holiday shopman, and the cheap young gentleman upon the spree, he 
hounded from his villages with every circumstance of contumely.

This purely artistic society is excellent for the young artist.  
The lads are mostly fools; they hold the latest orthodoxy in its 
crudeness; they are at that stage of education, for the most part, 
when a man is too much occupied with style to be aware of the 
necessity for any matter; and this, above all for the Englishman, 
is excellent.  To work grossly at the trade, to forget sentiment, 
to think of his material and nothing else, is, for awhile at least, 
the king's highway of progress.  Here, in England, too many 
painters and writers dwell dispersed, unshielded, among the 
intelligent bourgeois.  These, when they are not merely 
indifferent, prate to him about the lofty aims and moral influence 
of art.  And this is the lad's ruin.  For art is, first of all and 
last of all, a trade.  The love of words and not a desire to 
publish new discoveries, the love of form and not a novel reading 
of historical events, mark the vocation of the writer and the 
painter.  The arabesque, properly speaking, and even in literature, 
is the first fancy of the artist; he first plays with his material 
as a child plays with a kaleidoscope; and he is already in a second 
stage when he begins to use his pretty counters for the end of 
representation.  In that, he must pause long and toil faithfully; 
that is his apprenticeship; and it is only the few who will really 
grow beyond it, and go forward, fully equipped, to do the business 
of real art - to give life to abstractions and significance and 
charm to facts.  In the meanwhile, let him dwell much among his 
fellow-craftsmen.  They alone can take a serious interest in the 
childish tasks and pitiful successes of these years.  They alone 
can behold with equanimity this fingering of the dumb keyboard, 
this polishing of empty sentences, this dull and literal painting 
of dull and insignificant subjects.  Outsiders will spur him on.  
They will say, "Why do you not write a great book? paint a great 
picture?"  If his guardian angel fail him, they may even persuade 
him to the attempt, and, ten to one, his hand is coarsened and his 
style falsified for life.

And this brings me to a warning.  The life of the apprentice to any 
art is both unstrained and pleasing; it is strewn with small 
successes in the midst of a career of failure, patiently supported; 
the heaviest scholar is conscious of a certain progress; and if he 
come not appreciably nearer to the art of Shakespeare, grows 
letter-perfect in the domain of A-B, ab.  But the time comes when a 
man should cease prelusory gymnastic, stand up, put a violence upon 
his will, and, for better or worse, begin the business of creation.  
This evil day there is a tendency continually to postpone:  above 
all with painters.  They have made so many studies that it has 
become a habit; they make more, the walls of exhibitions blush with 
them; and death finds these aged students still busy with their 
horn-book.  This class of man finds a congenial home in artist 
villages; in the slang of the English colony at Barbizon we used to 
call them "Snoozers."  Continual returns to the city, the society 
of men farther advanced, the study of great works, a sense of 
humour or, if such a thing is to be had, a little religion or 
philosophy, are the means of treatment.  It will be time enough to 
think of curing the malady after it has been caught; for to catch 
it is the very thing for which you seek that dream-land of the 
painters' village.  "Snoozing" is a part of the artistic education; 
and the rudiments must be learned stupidly, all else being 
forgotten, as if they were an object in themselves.

Lastly, there is something, or there seems to be something, in the 
very air of France that communicates the love of style.  Precision, 
clarity, the cleanly and crafty employment of material, a grace in 
the handling, apart from any value in the thought, seem to be 
acquired by the mere residence; or if not acquired, become at least 
the more appreciated.  The air of Paris is alive with this 
technical inspiration.  And to leave that airy city and awake next 
day upon the borders of the forest is but to change externals.  The 
same spirit of dexterity and finish breathes from the long alleys 
and the lofty groves, from the wildernesses that are still pretty 
in their confusion, and the great plain that contrives to be 
decorative in its emptiness.


II


In spite of its really considerable extent, the forest of 
Fontainebleau is hardly anywhere tedious.  I know the whole western 
side of it with what, I suppose, I may call thoroughness; well 
enough at least to testify that there is no square mile without 
some special character and charm.  Such quarters, for instance, as 
the Long Rocher, the Bas-Breau, and the Reine Blanche, might be a 
hundred miles apart; they have scarce a point in common beyond the 
silence of the birds.  The two last are really conterminous; and in 
both are tall and ancient trees that have outlived a thousand 
political vicissitudes.  But in the one the great oaks prosper 
placidly upon an even floor; they beshadow a great field; and the 
air and the light are very free below their stretching boughs.  In 
the other the trees find difficult footing; castles of white rock 
lie tumbled one upon another, the foot slips, the crooked viper 
slumbers, the moss clings in the crevice; and above it all the 
great beech goes spiring and casting forth her arms, and, with a 
grace beyond church architecture, canopies this rugged chaos.  
Meanwhile, dividing the two cantons, the broad white causeway of 
the Paris road runs in an avenue:  a road conceived for pageantry 
and for triumphal marches, an avenue for an army; but, its days of 
glory over, it now lies grilling in the sun between cool groves, 
and only at intervals the vehicle of the cruising tourist is seen 
far away and faintly audible along its ample sweep.  A little upon 
one side, and you find a district of sand and birch and boulder; a 
little upon the other lies the valley of Apremont, all juniper and 
heather; and close beyond that you may walk into a zone of pine 
trees.  So artfully are the ingredients mingled.  Nor must it be 
forgotten that, in all this part, you come continually forth upon a 
hill-top, and behold the plain, northward and westward, like an 
unrefulgent sea; nor that all day long the shadows keep changing; 
and at last, to the red fires of sunset, night succeeds, and with 
the night a new forest, full of whisper, gloom, and fragrance.  
There are few things more renovating than to leave Paris, the 
lamplit arches of the Carrousel, and the long alignment of the 
glittering streets, and to bathe the senses in this fragrant 
darkness of the wood.

In this continual variety the mind is kept vividly alive.  It is a 
changeful place to paint, a stirring place to live in.  As fast as 
your foot carries you, you pass from scene to scene, each 
vigorously painted in the colours of the sun, each endeared by that 
hereditary spell of forests on the mind of man who still remembers 
and salutes the ancient refuge of his race.

And yet the forest has been civilised throughout.  The most savage 
corners bear a name, and have been cherished like antiquities; in 
the most remote, Nature has prepared and balanced her effects as if 
with conscious art; and man, with his guiding arrows of blue paint, 
has countersigned the picture.  After your farthest wandering, you 
are never surprised to come forth upon the vast avenue of highway, 
to strike the centre point of branching alleys, or to find the 
aqueduct trailing, thousand-footed, through the brush.  It is not a 
wilderness; it is rather a preserve.  And, fitly enough, the centre 
of the maze is not a hermit's cavern.  In the midst, a little 
mirthful town lies sunlit, humming with the business of pleasure; 
and the palace, breathing distinction and peopled by historic 
names, stands smokeless among gardens.

Perhaps the last attempt at savage life was that of the harmless 
humbug who called himself the hermit.  In a great tree, close by 
the highroad, he had built himself a little cabin after the manner 
of the Swiss Family Robinson; thither he mounted at night, by the 
romantic aid of a rope ladder; and if dirt be any proof of 
sincerity, the man was savage as a Sioux.  I had the pleasure of 
his acquaintance; he appeared grossly stupid, not in his perfect 
wits, and interested in nothing but small change; for that he had a 
great avidity.  In the course of time he proved to be a chicken-
stealer, and vanished from his perch; and perhaps from the first he 
was no true votary of forest freedom, but an ingenious, 
theatrically-minded beggar, and his cabin in the tree was only 
stock-in-trade to beg withal.  The choice of his position would 
seem to indicate so much; for if in the forest there are no places 
still to be discovered, there are many that have been forgotten, 
and that lie unvisited.  There, to be sure, are the blue arrows 
waiting to reconduct you, now blazed upon a tree, now posted in the 
corner of a rock.  But your security from interruption is complete; 
you might camp for weeks, if there were only water, and not a soul 
suspect your presence; and if I may suppose the reader to have 
committed some great crime and come to me for aid, I think I could 
still find my way to a small cavern, fitted with a hearth and 
chimney, where he might lie perfectly concealed.  A confederate 
landscape-painter might daily supply him with food; for water, he 
would have to make a nightly tramp as far as to the nearest pond; 
and at last, when the hue and cry began to blow over, he might get 
gently on the train at some side station, work round by a series of 
junctions, and be quietly captured at the frontier.

Thus Fontainebleau, although it is truly but a pleasure-ground, and 
although, in favourable weather, and in the more celebrated 
quarters, it literally buzzes with the tourist, yet has some of the 
immunities and offers some of the repose of natural forests.  And 
the solitary, although he must return at night to his frequented 
inn, may yet pass the day with his own thoughts in the 
companionable silence of the trees.  The demands of the imagination 
vary; some can be alone in a back garden looked upon by windows; 
others, like the ostrich, are content with a solitude that meets 
the eye; and others, again, expand in fancy to the very borders of 
their desert, and are irritably conscious of a hunter's camp in an 
adjacent county.  To these last, of course, Fontainebleau will seem 
but an extended tea-garden:  a Rosherville on a by-day.  But to the 
plain man it offers solitude:  an excellent thing in itself, and a 
good whet for company.


III


I was for some time a consistent Barbizonian; ET EGO IN ARCADIA 
VIXI, it was a pleasant season; and that noiseless hamlet lying 
close among the borders of the wood is for me, as for so many 
others, a green spot in memory.  The great Millet was just dead, 
the green shutters of his modest house were closed; his daughters 
were in mourning.  The date of my first visit was thus an epoch in 
the history of art:  in a lesser way, it was an epoch in the 
history of the Latin Quarter.  The PETIT CENACLE was dead and 
buried; Murger and his crew of sponging vagabonds were all at rest 
from their expedients; the tradition of their real life was nearly 
lost; and the petrified legend of the VIE DE BOHEME had become a 
sort of gospel, and still gave the cue to zealous imitators.  But 
if the book be written in rose-water, the imitation was still 
farther expurgated; honesty was the rule; the innkeepers gave, as I 
have said, almost unlimited credit; they suffered the seediest 
painter to depart, to take all his belongings, and to leave his 
bill unpaid; and if they sometimes lost, it was by English and 
Americans alone.  At the same time, the great influx of Anglo-
Saxons had begun to affect the life of the studious.  There had 
been disputes; and, in one instance at least, the English and the 
Americans had made common cause to prevent a cruel pleasantry.  It 
would be well if nations and races could communicate their 
qualities; but in practice when they look upon each other, they 
have an eye to nothing but defects.  The Anglo-Saxon is essentially 
dishonest; the French is devoid by nature of the principle that we 
call "Fair Play."  The Frenchman marvelled at the scruples of his 
guest, and, when that defender of innocence retired over-seas and 
left his bills unpaid, he marvelled once again; the good and evil 
were, in his eyes, part and parcel of the same eccentricity; a 
shrug expressed his judgment upon both.

At Barbizon there was no master, no pontiff in the arts.  Palizzi 
bore rule at Gretz - urbane, superior rule - his memory rich in 
anecdotes of the great men of yore, his mind fertile in theories; 
sceptical, composed, and venerable to the eye; and yet beneath 
these outworks, all twittering with Italian superstition, his eye 
scouting for omens, and the whole fabric of his manners giving way 
on the appearance of a hunchback.  Cernay had Pelouse, the 
admirable, placid Pelouse, smilingly critical of youth, who, when a 
full-blown commercial traveller, suddenly threw down his samples, 
bought a colour-box, and became the master whom we have all 
admired.  Marlotte, for a central figure, boasted Olivier de Penne.  
Only Barbizon, since the death of Millet, was a headless 
commonwealth.  Even its secondary lights, and those who in my day 
made the stranger welcome, have since deserted it.  The good 
Lachevre has departed, carrying his household gods; and long before 
that Gaston Lafenestre was taken from our midst by an untimely 
death.  He died before he had deserved success; it may be, he would 
never have deserved it; but his kind, comely, modest countenance 
still haunts the memory of all who knew him.  Another - whom I will 
not name - has moved farther on, pursuing the strange Odyssey of 
his decadence.  His days of royal favour had departed even then; 
but he still retained, in his narrower life at Barbizon, a certain 
stamp of conscious importance, hearty, friendly, filling the room, 
the occupant of several chairs; nor had he yet ceased his losing 
battle, still labouring upon great canvases that none would buy, 
still waiting the return of fortune.  But these days also were too 
good to last; and the former favourite of two sovereigns fled, if I 
heard the truth, by night.  There was a time when he was counted a 
great man, and Millet but a dauber; behold, how the whirligig of 
time brings in his revenges!  To pity Millet is a piece of 
arrogance; if life be hard for such resolute and pious spirits, it 
is harder still for us, had we the wit to understand it; but we may 
pity his unhappier rival, who, for no apparent merit, was raised to 
opulence and momentary fame, and, through no apparent fault was 
suffered step by step to sink again to nothing.  No misfortune can 
exceed the bitterness of such back-foremost progress, even bravely 
supported as it was; but to those also who were taken early from 
the easel, a regret is due.  From all the young men of this period, 
one stood out by the vigour of his promise; he was in the age of 
fermentation, enamoured of eccentricities.  "Il faut faire de la 
peinture nouvelle," was his watchword; but if time and experience 
had continued his education, if he had been granted health to 
return from these excursions to the steady and the central, I must 
believe that the name of Hills had become famous.

Siron's inn, that excellent artists' barrack, was managed upon easy 
principles.  At any hour of the night, when you returned from 
wandering in the forest, you went to the billiard-room and helped 
yourself to liquors, or descended to the cellar and returned laden 
with beer or wine.  The Sirons were all locked in slumber; there 
was none to check your inroads; only at the week's end a 
computation was made, the gross sum was divided, and a varying 
share set down to every lodger's name under the rubric:  ESTRATS.  
Upon the more long-suffering the larger tax was levied; and your 
bill lengthened in a direct proportion to the easiness of your 
disposition.  At any hour of the morning, again, you could get your 
coffee or cold milk, and set forth into the forest.  The doves had 
perhaps wakened you, fluttering into your chamber; and on the 
threshold of the inn you were met by the aroma of the forest.  
Close by were the great aisles, the mossy boulders, the 
interminable field of forest shadow.  There you were free to dream 
and wander.  And at noon, and again at six o'clock, a good meal 
awaited you on Siron's table.  The whole of your accommodation, set 
aside that varying item of the ESTRALS, cost you five francs a day; 
your bill was never offered you until you asked it; and if you were 
out of luck's way, you might depart for where you pleased and leave 
it pending.


IV


Theoretically, the house was open to all corners; practically, it 
was a kind of club.  The guests protected themselves, and, in so 
doing, they protected Siron.  Formal manners being laid aside, 
essential courtesy was the more rigidly exacted; the new arrival 
had to feel the pulse of the society; and a breach of its undefined 
observances was promptly punished.  A man might be as plain, as 
dull, as slovenly, as free of speech as he desired; but to a touch 
of presumption or a word of hectoring these free Barbizonians were 
as sensitive as a tea-party of maiden ladies.  I have seen people 
driven forth from Barbizon; it would be difficult to say in words 
what they had done, but they deserved their fate.  They had shown 
themselves unworthy to enjoy these corporate freedoms; they had 
pushed themselves; they had "made their head"; they wanted tact to 
appreciate the "fine shades" of Barbizonian etiquette.  And once 
they were condemned, the process of extrusion was ruthless in its 
cruelty; after one evening with the formidable Bodmer, the Baily of 
our commonwealth, the erring stranger was beheld no more; he rose 
exceeding early the next day, and the first coach conveyed him from 
the scene of his discomfiture.  These sentences of banishment were 
never, in my knowledge, delivered against an artist; such would, I 
believe, have been illegal; but the odd and pleasant fact is this, 
that they were never needed.  Painters, sculptors, writers, 
singers, I have seen all of these in Barbizon; and some were sulky, 
and some blatant and inane; but one and all entered at once into 
the spirit of the association.  This singular society is purely 
French, a creature of French virtues, and possibly of French 
defects.  It cannot be imitated by the English.  The roughness, the 
impatience, the more obvious selfishness, and even the more ardent 
friendships of the Anglo-Saxon, speedily dismember such a 
commonwealth.  But this random gathering of young French painters, 
with neither apparatus nor parade of government, yet kept the life 
of the place upon a certain footing, insensibly imposed their 
etiquette upon the docile, and by caustic speech enforced their 
edicts against the unwelcome.  To think of it is to wonder the more 
at the strange failure of their race upon the larger theatre.  This 
inbred civility - to use the word in its completest meaning - this 
natural and facile adjustment of contending liberties, seems all 
that is required to make a governable nation and a just and 
prosperous country.

Our society, thus purged and guarded, was full of high spirits, of 
laughter, and of the initiative of youth.  The few elder men who 
joined us were still young at heart, and took the key from their 
companions.  We returned from long stations in the fortifying air, 
our blood renewed by the sunshine, our spirits refreshed by the 
silence of the forest; the Babel of loud voices sounded good; we 
fell to eat and play like the natural man; and in the high inn 
chamber, panelled with indifferent pictures and lit by candles 
guttering in the night air, the talk and laughter sounded far into 
the night.  It was a good place and a good life for any naturally-
minded youth; better yet for the student of painting, and perhaps 
best of all for the student of letters.  He, too, was saturated in 
this atmosphere of style; he was shut out from the disturbing 
currents of the world, he might forget that there existed other and 
more pressing interests than that of art.  But, in such a place, it 
was hardly possible to write; he could not drug his conscience, 
like the painter, by the production of listless studies; he saw 
himself idle among many who were apparently, and some who were 
really, employed; and what with the impulse of increasing health 
and the continual provocation of romantic scenes, he became 
tormented with the desire to work.  He enjoyed a strenuous idleness 
full of visions, hearty meals, long, sweltering walks, mirth among 
companions; and still floating like music through his brain, 
foresights of great works that Shakespeare might be proud to have 
conceived, headless epics, glorious torsos of dramas, and words 
that were alive with import.  So in youth, like Moses from the 
mountain, we have sights of that House Beautiful of art which we 
shall never enter.  They are dreams and unsubstantial; visions of 
style that repose upon no base of human meaning; the last heart-
throbs of that excited amateur who has to die in all of us before 
the artist can be born.  But they come to us in such a rainbow of 
glory that all subsequent achievement appears dull and earthly in 
comparison.  We were all artists; almost all in the age of 
illusion, cultivating an imaginary genius, and walking to the 
strains of some deceiving Ariel; small wonder, indeed, if we were 
happy!  But art, of whatever nature, is a kind mistress; and though 
these dreams of youth fall by their own baselessness, others 
succeed, graver and more substantial; the symptoms change, the 
amiable malady endures; and still, at an equal distance, the House 
Beautiful shines upon its hill-top.


V


Gretz lies out of the forest, down by the bright river.  It boasts 
a mill, an ancient church, a castle, and a bridge of many 
sterlings.  And the bridge is a piece of public property; 
anonymously famous; beaming on the incurious dilettante from the 
walls of a hundred exhibitions.  I have seen it in the Salon; I 
have seen it in the Academy; I have seen it in the last French 
Exposition, excellently done by Bloomer; in a black-and-white by 
Mr. A. Henley, it once adorned this essay in the pages of the 
MAGAZINE OF ART.  Long-suffering bridge!  And if you visit Gretz 
to-morrow, you shall find another generation, camped at the bottom 
of Chevillon's garden under their white umbrellas, and doggedly 
painting it again.

The bridge taken for granted, Gretz is a less inspiring place than 
Barbizon.  I give it the palm over Cernay.  There is something 
ghastly in the great empty village square of Cernay, with the inn 
tables standing in one corner, as though the stage were set for 
rustic opera, and in the early morning all the painters breaking 
their fast upon white wine under the windows of the villagers.  It 
is vastly different to awake in Gretz, to go down the green inn-
garden, to find the river streaming through the bridge, and to see 
the dawn begin across the poplared level.  The meals are laid in 
the cool arbour, under fluttering leaves.  The splash of oars and 
bathers, the bathing costumes out to dry, the trim canoes beside 
the jetty, tell of a society that has an eye to pleasure.  There is 
"something to do" at Gretz.  Perhaps, for that very reason, I can 
recall no such enduring ardours, no such glories of exhilaration, 
as among the solemn groves and uneventful hours of Barbizon.  This 
"something to do" is a great enemy to joy; it is a way out of it; 
you wreak your high spirits on some cut-and-dry employment, and 
behold them gone!  But Gretz is a merry place after its kind:  
pretty to see, merry to inhabit.  The course of its pellucid river, 
whether up or down, is full of gentle attractions for the 
navigator:  islanded reed-mazes where, in autumn, the red berries 
cluster; the mirrored and inverted images of trees, lilies, and 
mills, and the foam and thunder of weirs.  And of all noble sweeps 
of roadway, none is nobler, on a windy dusk, than the highroad to 
Nemours between its lines of talking poplar.

But even Gretz is changed.  The old inn, long shored and trussed 
and buttressed, fell at length under the mere weight of years, and 
the place as it was is but a fading image in the memory of former 
guests.  They, indeed, recall the ancient wooden stair; they recall 
the rainy evening, the wide hearth, the blaze of the twig fire, and 
the company that gathered round the pillar in the kitchen.  But the 
material fabric is now dust; soon, with the last of its 
inhabitants, its very memory shall follow; and they, in their turn, 
shall suffer the same law, and, both in name and lineament, vanish 
from the world of men.  "For remembrance of the old house' sake," 
as Pepys once quaintly put it, let me tell one story.  When the 
tide of invasion swept over France, two foreign painters were left 
stranded and penniless in Gretz; and there, until the war was over, 
the Chevillons ungrudgingly harboured them.  It was difficult to 
obtain supplies; but the two waifs were still welcome to the best, 
sat down daily with the family to table, and at the due intervals 
were supplied with clean napkins, which they scrupled to employ.  
Madame Chevillon observed the fact and reprimanded them.  But they 
stood firm; eat they must, but having no money they would soil no 
napkins.


VI


Nemours and Moret, for all they are so picturesque, have been 
little visited by painters.  They are, indeed, too populous; they 
have manners of their own, and might resist the drastic process of 
colonisation.  Montigny has been somewhat strangely neglected, I 
never knew it inhabited but once, when Will H. Low installed 
himself there with a barrel of PIQUETTE, and entertained his 
friends in a leafy trellis above the weir, in sight of the green 
country and to the music of the falling water.  It was a most airy, 
quaint, and pleasant place of residence, just too rustic to be 
stagey; and from my memories of the place in general, and that 
garden trellis in particular - at morning, visited by birds, or at 
night, when the dew fell and the stars were of the party - I am 
inclined to think perhaps too favourably of the future of Montigny.  
Chailly-en-Biere has outlived all things, and lies dustily 
slumbering in the plain - the cemetery of itself.  The great road 
remains to testify of its former bustle of postilions and carriage 
bells; and, like memorial tablets, there still hang in the inn room 
the paintings of a former generation, dead or decorated long ago.  
In my time, one man only, greatly daring, dwelt there.  From time 
to time he would walk over to Barbizon like a shade revisiting the 
glimpses of the moon, and after some communication with flesh and 
blood return to his austere hermitage.  But even he, when I last 
revisited the forest, had come to Barbizon for good, and closed the 
roll of Chaillyites.  It may revive - but I much doubt it.  Acheres 
and Recloses still wait a pioneer; Bourron is out of the question, 
being merely Gretz over again, without the river, the bridge, or 
the beauty; and of all the possible places on the western side, 
Marlotte alone remains to be discussed.  I scarcely know Marlotte, 
and, very likely for that reason, am not much in love with it.  It 
seems a glaring and unsightly hamlet.  The inn of Mother Antonie is 
unattractive; and its more reputable rival, though comfortable 
enough, is commonplace.  Marlotte has a name; it is famous; if I 
were the young painter I would leave it alone in its glory.


VII


These are the words of an old stager; and though time is a good 
conservative in forest places, much may be untrue to-day.  Many of 
us have passed Arcadian days there and moved on, but yet left a 
portion of our souls behind us buried in the woods.  I would not 
dig for these reliquiae; they are incommunicable treasures that 
will not enrich the finder; and yet there may lie, interred below 
great oaks or scattered along forest paths, stores of youth's 
dynamite and dear remembrances.  And as one generation passes on 
and renovates the field of tillage for the next, I entertain a 
fancy that when the young men of to-day go forth into the forest 
they shall find the air still vitalised by the spirits of their 
predecessors, and, like those "unheard melodies" that are the 
sweetest of all, the memory of our laughter shall still haunt the 
field of trees.  Those merry voices that in woods call the wanderer 
farther, those thrilling silences and whispers of the groves, 
surely in Fontainebleau they must be vocal of me and my companions?  
We are not content to pass away entirely from the scenes of our 
delight; we would leave, if but in gratitude, a pillar and a 
legend.

One generation after another fall like honey-bees upon this 
memorable forest, rifle its sweets, pack themselves with vital 
memories, and when the theft is consummated depart again into life 
richer, but poorer also.  The forest, indeed, they have possessed, 
from that day forward it is theirs indissolubly, and they will 
return to walk in it at night in the fondest of their dreams, and 
use it for ever in their books and pictures.  Yet when they made 
their packets, and put up their notes and sketches, something, it 
should seem, had been forgotten.  A projection of themselves shall 
appear to haunt unfriended these scenes of happiness, a natural 
child of fancy, begotten and forgotten unawares.  Over the whole 
field of our wanderings such fetches are still travelling like 
indefatigable bagmen; but the imps of Fontainebleau, as of all 
beloved spots, are very long of life, and memory is piously 
unwilling to forget their orphanage.  If anywhere about that wood 
you meet my airy bantling, greet him with tenderness.  He was a 
pleasant lad, though now abandoned.  And when it comes to your own 
turn to quit the forest, may you leave behind you such another; no 
Antony or Werther, let us hope, no tearful whipster, but, as 
becomes this not uncheerful and most active age in which we figure, 
the child of happy hours.

No art, it may be said, was ever perfect, and not many noble, that 
has not been mirthfully conceived.

And no man, it may be added, was ever anything but a wet blanket 
and a cross to his companions who boasted not a copious spirit of 
enjoyment.  Whether as man or artist let the youth make haste to 
Fontainebleau, and once there let him address himself to the spirit 
of the place; he will learn more from exercise than from studies, 
although both are necessary; and if he can get into his heart the 
gaiety and inspiration of the woods he will have gone far to undo 
the evil of his sketches.  A spirit once well strung up to the 
concert-pitch of the primeval out-of-doors will hardly dare to 
finish a study and magniloquently ticket it a picture.  The 
incommunicable thrill of things, that is the tuning-fork by which 
we test the flatness of our art.  Here it is that Nature teaches 
and condemns, and still spurs up to further effort and new failure.  
Thus it is that she sets us blushing at our ignorant and tepid 
works; and the more we find of these inspiring shocks the less 
shall we be apt to love the literal in our productions.  In all 
sciences and senses the letter kills; and to-day, when cackling 
human geese express their ignorant condemnation of all studio 
pictures, it is a lesson most useful to be learnt.  Let the young 
painter go to Fontainebleau, and while he stupefies himself with 
studies that teach him the mechanical side of his trade, let him 
walk in the great air, and be a servant of mirth, and not pick and 
botanise, but wait upon the moods of nature.  So he will learn - or 
learn not to forget - the poetry of life and earth, which, when he 
has acquired his track, will save him from joyless reproduction.

[1882.]



CHAPTER IV - EPILOGUE TO "AN INLAND VOYAGE"



THE country where they journeyed, that green, breezy valley of the 
Loing, is one very attractive to cheerful and solitary people.  The 
weather was superb; all night it thundered and lightened, and the 
rain fell in sheets; by day, the heavens were cloudless, the sun 
fervent, the air vigorous and pure.  They walked separate:  the 
Cigarette plodding behind with some philosophy, the lean Arethusa 
posting on ahead.  Thus each enjoyed his own reflections by the 
way; each had perhaps time to tire of them before he met his 
comrade at the designated inn; and the pleasures of society and 
solitude combined to fill the day.  The Arethusa carried in his 
knapsack the works of Charles of Orleans, and employed some of the 
hours of travel in the concoction of English roundels.  In this 
path, he must thus have preceded Mr. Lang, Mr. Dobson, Mr. Henley, 
and all contemporary roundeleers; but for good reasons, he will be 
the last to publish the result.  The Cigarette walked burthened 
with a volume of Michelet.  And both these books, it will be seen, 
played a part in the subsequent adventure.

The Arethusa was unwisely dressed.  He is no precisian in attire; 
but by all accounts, he was never so ill-inspired as on that tramp; 
having set forth indeed, upon a moment's notice, from the most 
unfashionable spot in Europe, Barbizon.  On his head he wore a 
smoking-cap of Indian work, the gold lace pitifully frayed and 
tarnished.  A flannel shirt of an agreeable dark hue, which the 
satirical called black; a light tweed coat made by a good English 
tailor; ready-made cheap linen trousers and leathern gaiters 
completed his array.  In person, he is exceptionally lean; and his 
face is not, like those of happier mortals, a certificate.  For 
years he could not pass a frontier or visit a bank without 
suspicion; the police everywhere, but in his native city, looked 
askance upon him; and (though I am sure it will not be credited) he 
is actually denied admittance to the casino of Monte Carlo.  If you 
will imagine him, dressed as above, stooping under his knapsack, 
walking nearly five miles an hour with the folds of the ready-made 
trousers fluttering about his spindle shanks, and still looking 
eagerly round him as if in terror of pursuit - the figure, when 
realised, is far from reassuring.  When Villon journeyed (perhaps 
by the same pleasant valley) to his exile at Roussillon, I wonder 
if he had not something of the same appearance.  Something of the 
same preoccupation he had beyond a doubt, for he too must have 
tinkered verses as he walked, with more success than his successor.  
And if he had anything like the same inspiring weather, the same 
nights of uproar, men in armour rolling and resounding down the 
stairs of heaven, the rain hissing on the village streets, the wild 
bull's-eye of the storm flashing all night long into the bare inn-
chamber - the same sweet return of day, the same unfathomable blue 
of noon, the same high-coloured, halcyon eves - and above all, if 
he had anything like as good a comrade, anything like as keen a 
relish for what he saw, and what he ate, and the rivers that he 
bathed in, and the rubbish that he wrote, I would exchange estates 
to-day with the poor exile, and count myself a gainer.

But there was another point of similarity between the two journeys, 
for which the Arethusa was to pay dear:  both were gone upon in 
days of incomplete security.  It was not long after the Franco-
Prussian war.  Swiftly as men forget, that country-side was still 
alive with tales of uhlans, and outlying sentries, and hairbreadth 
'scapes from the ignominious cord, and pleasant momentary 
friendships between invader and invaded.  A year, at the most two 
years later, you might have tramped all that country over and not 
heard one anecdote.  And a year or two later, you would - if you 
were a rather ill-looking young man in nondescript array - have 
gone your rounds in greater safety; for along with more interesting 
matter, the Prussian spy would have somewhat faded from men's 
imaginations.

For all that, our voyager had got beyond Chateau Renard before he 
was conscious of arousing wonder.  On the road between that place 
and Chatillon-sur-Loing, however, he encountered a rural postman; 
they fell together in talk, and spoke of a variety of subjects; but 
through one and all, the postman was still visibly preoccupied, and 
his eyes were faithful to the Arethusa's knapsack.  At last, with 
mysterious roguishness, he inquired what it contained, and on being 
answered, shook his head with kindly incredulity.  "NON," said he, 
"NON, VOUS AVEZ DES PORTRAITS."  And then with a languishing 
appeal, "VOYONS, show me the portraits!"  It was some little while 
before the Arethusa, with a shout of laughter, recognised his 
drift.  By portraits he meant indecent photographs; and in the 
Arethusa, an austere and rising author, he thought to have 
identified a pornographic colporteur.  When countryfolk in France 
have made up their minds as to a person's calling, argument is 
fruitless.  Along all the rest of the way, the postman piped and 
fluted meltingly to get a sight of the collection; now he would 
upbraid, now he would reason - "VOYONS, I will tell nobody"; then 
he tried corruption, and insisted on paying for a glass of wine; 
and, at last when their ways separated - "NON," said he, "CE N'EST 
PAS BIEN DE VOTRE PART.  O NON, CE N'EST PAS BIEN."  And shaking 
his head with quite a sentimental sense of injury, he departed 
unrefreshed.

On certain little difficulties encountered by the Arethusa at 
Chatillon-sur-Loing, I have not space to dwell; another Chatillon, 
of grislier memory, looms too near at hand.  But the next day, in a 
certain hamlet called La Jussiere, he stopped to drink a glass of 
syrup in a very poor, bare drinking shop.  The hostess, a comely 
woman, suckling a child, examined the traveller with kindly and 
pitying eyes.  "You are not of this department?" she asked.  The 
Arethusa told her he was English.  "Ah!" she said, surprised.  "We 
have no English.  We have many Italians, however, and they do very 
well; they do not complain of the people of hereabouts.  An 
Englishman may do very well also; it will be something new."  Here 
was a dark saying, over which the Arethusa pondered as he drank his 
grenadine; but when he rose and asked what was to pay, the light 
came upon him in a flash.  "O, POUR VOUS," replied the landlady,  
"a halfpenny!"  POUR VOUS?  By heaven, she took him for a beggar!  
He paid his halfpenny, feeling that it were ungracious to correct 
her.  But when he was forth again upon the road, he became vexed in 
spirit.  The conscience is no gentleman, he is a rabbinical fellow; 
and his conscience told him he had stolen the syrup.

That night the travellers slept in Gien; the next day they passed 
the river and set forth (severally, as their custom was) on a short 
stage through the green plain upon the Berry side, to Chatillon-
sur-Loire.  It was the first day of the shooting; and the air rang 
with the report of firearms and the admiring cries of sportsmen.  
Overhead the birds were in consternation, wheeling in clouds, 
settling and re-arising.  And yet with all this bustle on either 
hand, the road itself lay solitary.  The Arethusa smoked a pipe 
beside a milestone, and I remember he laid down very exactly all he 
was to do at Chatillon:  how he was to enjoy a cold plunge, to 
change his shirt, and to await the Cigarette's arrival, in sublime 
inaction, by the margin of the Loire.  Fired by these ideas, he 
pushed the more rapidly forward, and came, early in the afternoon 
and in a breathing heat, to the entering-in of that ill-fated town.  
Childe Roland to the dark tower came.

A polite gendarme threw his shadow on the path.

"MONSIEUR EST VOYAGEUR?" he asked.

And the Arethusa, strong in his innocence, forgetful of his vile 
attire, replied - I had almost said with gaiety:  "So it would 
appear."

 "His papers are in order?" said the gendarme.  And when the 
Arethusa, with a slight change of voice, admitted he had none, he 
was informed (politely enough) that he must appear before the 
Commissary.

The Commissary sat at a table in his bedroom, stripped to the shirt 
and trousers, but still copiously perspiring; and when he turned 
upon the prisoner a large meaningless countenance, that was (like 
Bardolph's) "all whelks and bubuckles," the dullest might have been 
prepared for grief.  Here was a stupid man, sleepy with the heat 
and fretful at the interruption, whom neither appeal nor argument 
could reach.

THE COMMISSARY.  You have no papers?

THE ARETHUSA.  Not here.

THE COMMISSARY.  Why?

THE ARETHUSA.  I have left them behind in my valise.

THE COMMISSARY.  You know, however, that it is forbidden to 
circulate without papers?

THE ARETHUSA.  Pardon me:  I am convinced of the contrary.  I am 
here on my rights as an English subject by international treaty.

THE COMMISSARY (WITH SCORN).  You call yourself an Englishman?

THE ARETHUSA.  I do.

THE COMMISSARY.  Humph. - What is your trade?

THE ARETHUSA.  I am a Scotch advocate.

THE COMMISSARY (WITH SINGULAR ANNOYANCE).  A Scotch advocate!  Do 
you then pretend to support yourself by that in this department?

The Arethusa modestly disclaimed the pretension.  The Commissary 
had scored a point.

THE COMMISSARY.  Why, then, do you travel?

THE ARETHUSA.  I travel for pleasure.

THE COMMISSARY (POINTING TO THE KNAPSACK, AND WITH SUBLIME 
INCREDULITY).  AVEC CA?  VOYEZ-VOUS, JE SUIS UN HOMME INTELLIGENT!  
(With that?  Look here, I am a person of intelligence!)

The culprit remaining silent under this home thrust, the Commissary 
relished his triumph for a while, and then demanded (like the 
postman, but with what different expectations!) to see the contents 
of the knapsack.  And here the Arethusa, not yet sufficiently awake 
to his position, fell into a grave mistake.  There was little or no 
furniture in the room except the Commissary's chair and table; and 
to facilitate matters, the Arethusa (with all the innocence on 
earth) leant the knapsack on a corner of the bed.  The Commissary 
fairly bounded from his seat; his face and neck flushed past 
purple, almost into blue; and he screamed to lay the desecrating 
object on the floor.

The knapsack proved to contain a change of shirts, of shoes, of 
socks, and of linen trousers, a small dressing-case, a piece of 
soap in one of the shoes, two volumes of the COLLECTION JANNET 
lettered POESIES DE CHARLES D'ORLEANS, a map, and a version book 
containing divers notes in prose and the remarkable English 
roundels of the voyager, still to this day unpublished:  the 
Commissary of Chatillon is the only living man who has clapped an 
eye on these artistic trifles.  He turned the assortment over with 
a contumelious finger; it was plain from his daintiness that he 
regarded the Arethusa and all his belongings as the very temple of 
infection.  Still there was nothing suspicious about the map, 
nothing really criminal except the roundels; as for Charles of 
Orleans, to the ignorant mind of the prisoner, he seemed as good as 
a certificate; and it was supposed the farce was nearly over.

The inquisitor resumed his seat.

THE COMMISSARY (AFTER A PAUSE).  EH BIEN, JE VAIS VOUS DIRE CE QUE 
VOUS ETES.  VOUS ETES ALLEMAND ET VOUS VENEZ CHANTER A LA FOIRE.  
(Well, then, I will tell you what you are.  You are a German and 
have come to sing at the fair.)

THE ARETHUSA.  Would you like to hear me sing?  I believe I could 
convince you of the contrary.

THE COMMISSARY.  PAS DE PLAISANTERIE, MONSIEUR!

THE ARETHUSA.  Well, sir, oblige me at least by looking at this 
book.  Here, I open it with my eyes shut.  Read one of these songs 
- read this one - and tell me, you who are a man of intelligence, 
if it would be possible to sing it at a fair?

THE COMMISSARY (CRITICALLY).  MAIS OUI.  TRES BIEN.

THE ARETHUSA.  COMMENT, MONSIEUR!  What!  But do you not observe it 
is antique.  It is difficult to understand, even for you and me; 
but for the audience at a fair, it would be meaningless.

THE COMMISSARY (TAKING A PEN).  ENFIN, IL FAUI EN FINIR.  What is 
your name?

THE ARETHUSA (SPEAKING WITH THE SWALLOWING VIVACITY OF THE 
ENGLISH).  Robert-Louis-Stev'ns'n.

THE COMMISSARY (AGHAST).  HE!  QUOI?

THE ARETHUSA (PERCEIVING AND IMPROVING HIS ADVANTAGE).  Rob'rt-
Lou's-Stev'ns'n.

THE COMMISSARY (AFTER SEVERAL CONFLICTS WITH HIS PEN).  EH BIEN, IL 
FAUT SE PASSER DU NOM.  CA NE S'ECRIT PAS.  (Well, we must do 
without the name:  it is unspellable.)

The above is a rough summary of this momentous conversation, in 
which I have been chiefly careful to preserve the plums of the 
Commissary; but the remainder of the scene, perhaps because of his 
rising anger, has left but little definite in the memory of the 
Arethusa.  The Commissary was not, I think, a practised literary 
man; no sooner, at least, had he taken pen in hand and embarked on 
the composition of the PROCES-VERBAL, than he became distinctly 
more uncivil and began to show a predilection for that simplest of 
all forms of repartee:  "You lie!"  Several times the Arethusa let 
it pass, and then suddenly flared up, refused to accept more 
insults or to answer further questions, defied the Commissary to do 
his worst, and promised him, if he did, that he should bitterly 
repent it.  Perhaps if he had worn this proud front from the first, 
instead of beginning with a sense of entertainment and then going 
on to argue, the thing might have turned otherwise; for even at 
this eleventh hour the Commissary was visibly staggered.  But it 
was too late; he had been challenged the PROCES-VERBAL was begun; 
and he again squared his elbows over his writing, and the Arethusa 
was led forth a prisoner.

A step or two down the hot road stood the gendarmerie.  Thither was 
our unfortunate conducted, and there he was bidden to empty forth 
the contents of his pockets.  A handkerchief, a pen, a pencil, a 
pipe and tobacco, matches, and some ten francs of change:  that was 
all.  Not a file, not a cipher, not a scrap of writing whether to 
identify or to condemn.  The very gendarme was appalled before such 
destitution.

"I regret," he said, "that I arrested you, for I see that you are 
no VOYOU."  And he promised him every indulgence.

The Arethusa, thus encouraged, asked for his pipe.  That he was 
told was impossible, but if he chewed, he might have some tobacco.  
He did not chew, however, and asked instead to have his 
handkerchief.

"NON," said the gendarme.  "NOUS AVONS EU DES HISTOIRES DE GENS QUI 
SE SONT PENDUS."  (No, we have had histories of people who hanged 
themselves.)

"What," cried the Arethusa.  "And is it for that you refuse me my 
handkerchief?  But see how much more easily I could hang myself in 
my trousers!"

The man was struck by the novelty of the idea; but he stuck to his 
colours, and only continued to repeat vague offers of service.

"At least," said the Arethusa, "be sure that you arrest my comrade; 
he will follow me ere long on the same road, and you can tell him 
by the sack upon his shoulders."

This promised, the prisoner was led round into the back court of 
the building, a cellar door was opened, he was motioned down the 
stair, and bolts grated and chains clanged behind his descending 
person.

The philosophic and still more the imaginative mind is apt to 
suppose itself prepared for any mortal accident.  Prison, among 
other ills, was one that had been often faced by the undaunted 
Arethusa.  Even as he went down the stairs, he was telling himself 
that here was a famous occasion for a roundel, and that like the 
committed linnets of the tuneful cavalier, he too would make his 
prison musical.  I will tell the truth at once:  the roundel was 
never written, or it should be printed in this place, to raise a 
smile.  Two reasons interfered:  the first moral, the second 
physical.

It is one of the curiosities of human nature, that although all men 
are liars, they can none of them bear to be told so of themselves.  
To get and take the lie with equanimity is a stretch beyond the 
stoic; and the Arethusa, who had been surfeited upon that insult, 
was blazing inwardly with a white heat of smothered wrath.  But the 
physical had also its part.  The cellar in which he was confined 
was some feet underground, and it was only lighted by an unglazed, 
narrow aperture high up in the wall and smothered in the leaves of 
a green vine.  The walls were of naked masonry, the floor of bare 
earth; by way of furniture there was an earthenware basin, a water-
jug, and a wooden bedstead with a blue-gray cloak for bedding.  To 
be taken from the hot air of a summer's afternoon, the 
reverberation of the road and the stir of rapid exercise, and 
plunged into the gloom and damp of this receptacle for vagabonds, 
struck an instant chill upon the Arethusa's blood.  Now see in how 
small a matter a hardship may consist:  the floor was exceedingly 
uneven underfoot, with the very spade-marks, I suppose, of the 
labourers who dug the foundations of the barrack; and what with the 
poor twilight and the irregular surface, walking was impossible.  
The caged author resisted for a good while; but the chill of the 
place struck deeper and deeper; and at length, with such reluctance 
as you may fancy, he was driven to climb upon the bed and wrap 
himself in the public covering.  There, then, he lay upon the verge 
of shivering, plunged in semi-darkness, wound in a garment whose 
touch he dreaded like the plague, and (in a spirit far removed from 
resignation) telling the roll of the insults he had just received.  
These are not circumstances favourable to the muse.

Meantime (to look at the upper surface where the sun was still 
shining and the guns of sportsmen were still noisy through the 
tufted plain) the Cigarette was drawing near at his more 
philosophic pace.  In those days of liberty and health he was the 
constant partner of the Arethusa, and had ample opportunity to 
share in that gentleman's disfavour with the police.  Many a bitter 
bowl had he partaken of with that disastrous comrade.  He was 
himself a man born to float easily through life, his face and 
manner artfully recommending him to all.  There was but one 
suspicious circumstance he could not carry off, and that was his 
companion.  He will not readily forget the Commissary in what is 
ironically called the free town of Frankfort-on-the-Main ; nor the 
Franco-Belgian frontier; nor the inn at La Fere; last, but not 
least, he is pretty certain to remember Chatillon-sur-Loire.

At the town entry, the gendarme culled him like a wayside flower; 
and a moment later, two persons, in a high state of surprise, were 
confronted in the Commissary's office.  For if the Cigarette was 
surprised to be arrested, the Commissary was no less taken aback by 
the appearance and appointments of his captive.  Here was a man 
about whom there could be no mistake:  a man of an unquestionable 
and unassailable manner, in apple-pie order, dressed not with 
neatness merely but elegance, ready with his passport, at a word, 
and well supplied with money:  a man the Commissary would have 
doffed his hat to on chance upon the highway; and this BEAU 
CAVALIER unblushingly claimed the Arethusa for his comrade!  The 
conclusion of the interview was foregone; of its humours, I 
remember only one.  "Baronet?" demanded the magistrate, glancing up 
from the passport.  "ALORS, MONSIEUR, VOUS ETES LE FIRS D'UN 
BARON?"  And when the Cigarette (his one mistake throughout the 
interview) denied the soft impeachment, "ALORS," from the 
Commissary, "CE N'EST PAS VOTRE PASSEPORT!"  But these were 
ineffectual thunders; he never dreamed of laying hands upon the 
Cigarette; presently he fell into a mood of unrestrained 
admiration, gloating over the contents of the knapsack, commanding 
our friend's tailor.  Ah, what an honoured guest was the Commissary 
entertaining! what suitable clothes he wore for the warm weather! 
what beautiful maps, what an attractive work of history he carried 
in his knapsack!  You are to understand there was now but one point 
of difference between them:  what was to be done with the Arethusa? 
the Cigarette demanding his release, the Commissary still claiming 
him as the dungeon's own.  Now it chanced that the Cigarette had 
passed some years of his life in Egypt, where he had made 
acquaintance with two very bad things, cholera morbus and pashas; 
and in the eye of the Commissary, as he fingered the volume of 
Michelet, it seemed to our traveller there was something Turkish.  
I pass over this lightly; it is highly possible there was some 
misunderstanding, highly possible that the Commissary (charmed with 
his visitor) supposed the attraction to be mutual and took for an 
act of growing friendship what the Cigarette himself regarded as a 
bribe.  And at any rate, was there ever a bribe more singular than 
an odd volume of Michelet's history?  The work was promised him for 
the morrow, before our departure; and presently after, either 
because he had his price, or to show that he was not the man to be 
behind in friendly offices - "EH BIEN," he said, "JE SUPPOSE QU'IL 
FAUT LAHER VOIRE CAMARADE."  And he tore up that feast of humour, 
the unfinished PROCES-VERBAL.  Ah, if he had only torn up instead 
the Arethusa's roundels!  There were many works burnt at 
Alexandria, there are many treasured in the British Museum, that I 
could better spare than the PROCES-VERBAL of Chatillon.  Poor 
bubuckled Commissary!  I begin to be sorry that he never had his 
Michelet:  perceiving in him fine human traits, a broad-based 
stupidity, a gusto in his magisterial functions, a taste for 
letters, a ready admiration for the admirable.  And if he did not 
admire the Arethusa, he was not alone in that.

To the imprisoned one, shivering under the public covering, there 
came suddenly a noise of bolts and chains.  He sprang to his feet, 
ready to welcome a companion in calamity; and instead of that, the 
door was flung wide, the friendly gendarme appeared above in the 
strong daylight, and with a magnificent gesture (being probably a 
student of the drama) - "VOUS ETES LIBRE!" he said.  None too soon 
for the Arethusa.  I doubt if he had been half-an-hour imprisoned; 
but by the watch in a man's brain (which was the only watch he 
carried) he should have been eight times longer; and he passed 
forth with ecstasy up the cellar stairs into the healing warmth of 
the afternoon sun; and the breath of the earth came as sweet as a 
cow's into his nostril; and he heard again (and could have laughed 
for pleasure) the concord of delicate noises that we call the hum 
of life.

And here it might be thought that my history ended; but not so, 
this was an act-drop and not the curtain.  Upon what followed in 
front of the barrack, since there was a lady in the case, I scruple 
to expatiate.  The wife of the Marechal-des-logis was a handsome 
woman, and yet the Arethusa was not sorry to be gone from her 
society.  Something of her image, cool as a peach on that hot 
afternoon, still lingers in his memory:  yet more of her 
conversation.  "You have there a very fine parlour," said the poor 
gentleman. - "Ah," said Madame la Marechale (des-logis), "you are 
very well acquainted with such parlours!"  And you should have seen 
with what a hard and scornful eye she measured the vagabond before 
her!  I do not think he ever hated the Commissary; but before that 
interview was at an end, he hated Madame la Marechale.  His passion 
(as I am led to understand by one who was present) stood confessed 
in a burning eye, a pale cheek, and a trembling utterance; Madame 
meanwhile tasting the joys of the matador, goading him with barbed 
words and staring him coldly down.

It was certainly good to be away from this lady, and better still 
to sit down to an excellent dinner in the inn.  Here, too, the 
despised travellers scraped acquaintance with their next neighbour, 
a gentleman of these parts, returned from the day's sport, who had 
the good taste to find pleasure in their society.  The dinner at an 
end, the gentleman proposed the acquaintance should be ripened in 
the cafe.

The cafe was crowded with sportsmen conclamantly explaining to each 
other and the world the smallness of their bags.  About the centre 
of the room, the Cigarette and the Arethusa sat with their new 
acquaintance; a trio very well pleased, for the travellers (after 
their late experience) were greedy of consideration, and their 
sportsman rejoiced in a pair of patient listeners.  Suddenly the 
glass door flew open with a crash; the Marechal-des-logis appeared 
in the interval, gorgeously belted and befrogged, entered without 
salutation, strode up the room with a clang of spurs and weapons, 
and disappeared through a door at the far end.  Close at his heels 
followed the Arethusa's gendarme of the afternoon, imitating, with 
a nice shade of difference, the imperial bearing of his chief; 
only, as he passed, he struck lightly with his open hand on the 
shoulder of his late captive, and with that ringing, dramatic 
utterance of which he had the secret - "SUIVEZ!" said he.

The arrest of the members, the oath of the Tennis Court, the 
signing of the declaration of independence, Mark Antony's oration, 
all the brave scenes of history, I conceive as having been not 
unlike that evening in the cafe at Chatillon.  Terror breathed upon 
the assembly.  A moment later, when the Arethusa had followed his 
recaptors into the farther part of the house, the Cigarette found 
himself alone with his coffee in a ring of empty chairs and tables, 
all the lusty sportsmen huddled into corners, all their clamorous 
voices hushed in whispering, all their eyes shooting at him 
furtively as at a leper.

And the Arethusa?  Well, he had a long, sometimes a trying, 
interview in the back kitchen.  The Marechal-des-logis, who was a 
very handsome man, and I believe both intelligent and honest, had 
no clear opinion on the case.  He thought the Commissary had done 
wrong, but he did not wish to get his subordinates into trouble; 
and he proposed this, that, and the other, to all of which the 
Arethusa (with a growing sense of his position) demurred.

"In short," suggested the Arethusa, "you want to wash your hands of 
further responsibility?  Well, then, let me go to Paris."

The Marechal-des-logis looked at his watch.

"You may leave," said he, "by the ten o'clock train for Paris."

And at noon the next day the travellers were telling their 
misadventure in the dining-room at Siron's.



CHAPTER V - RANDOM MEMORIES



I. - THE COAST OF FIFE


MANY writers have vigorously described the pains of the first day 
or the first night at school; to a boy of any enterprise, I 
believe, they are more often agreeably exciting.  Misery - or at 
least misery unrelieved - is confined to another period, to the 
days of suspense and the "dreadful looking-for" of departure; when 
the old life is running to an end, and the new life, with its new 
interests, not yet begun:  and to the pain of an imminent parting, 
there is added the unrest of a state of conscious pre-existence.  
The area railings, the beloved shop-window, the smell of semi-
suburban tanpits, the song of the church bells upon a Sunday, the 
thin, high voices of compatriot children in a playing-field - what 
a sudden, what an overpowering pathos breathes to him from each 
familiar circumstance!  The assaults of sorrow come not from 
within, as it seems to him, but from without.  I was proud and glad 
to go to school; had I been let alone, I could have borne up like 
any hero; but there was around me, in all my native town, a 
conspiracy of lamentation:  "Poor little boy, he is going away - 
unkind little boy, he is going to leave us"; so the unspoken 
burthen followed me as I went, with yearning and reproach.  And at 
length, one melancholy afternoon in the early autumn, and at a 
place where it seems to me, looking back, it must be always autumn 
and generally Sunday, there came suddenly upon the face of all I 
saw - the long empty road, the lines of the tall houses, the church 
upon the hill, the woody hillside garden - a look of such a 
piercing sadness that my heart died; and seating myself on a door-
step, I shed tears of miserable sympathy.  A benevolent cat 
cumbered me the while with consolations - we two were alone in all 
that was visible of the London Road:  two poor waifs who had each 
tasted sorrow - and she fawned upon the weeper, and gambolled for 
his entertainment, watching the effect it seemed, with motherly 
eyes.

For the sake of the cat, God bless her!  I confessed at home the 
story of my weakness; and so it comes about that I owed a certain 
journey, and the reader owes the present paper, to a cat in the 
London Road.  It was judged, if I had thus brimmed over on the 
public highway, some change of scene was (in the medical sense) 
indicated; my father at the time was visiting the harbour lights of 
Scotland; and it was decided he should take me along with him 
around a portion of the shores of Fife; my first professional tour, 
my first journey in the complete character of man, without the help 
of petticoats.

The Kingdom of Fife (that royal province) may be observed by the 
curious on the map, occupying a tongue of land between the firths 
of Forth and Tay.  It may be continually seen from many parts of 
Edinburgh (among the rest, from the windows of my father's house) 
dying away into the distance and the easterly HAAR with one smoky 
seaside town beyond another, or in winter printing on the gray 
heaven some glittering hill-tops.  It has no beauty to recommend 
it, being a low, sea-salted, wind-vexed promontory; trees very 
rare, except (as common on the east coast) along the dens of 
rivers; the fields well cultivated, I understand, but not lovely to 
the eye.  It is of the coast I speak:  the interior may be the 
garden of Eden.  History broods over that part of the world like 
the easterly HAAR.  Even on the map, its long row of Gaelic place-
names bear testimony to an old and settled race.  Of these little 
towns, posted along the shore as close as sedges, each with its bit 
of harbour, its old weather-beaten church or public building, its 
flavour of decayed prosperity and decaying fish, not one but has 
its legend, quaint or tragic:  Dunfermline, in whose royal towers 
the king may be still observed (in the ballad) drinking the blood-
red wine; somnolent Inverkeithing, once the quarantine of Leith; 
Aberdour, hard by the monastic islet of Inchcolm, hard by 
Donibristle where the "bonny face was spoiled"; Burntisland where, 
when Paul Jones was off the coast, the Reverend Mr. Shirra had a 
table carried between tidemarks, and publicly prayed against the 
rover at the pitch of his voice and his broad lowland dialect; 
Kinghorn, where Alexander "brak's neckbane" and left Scotland to 
the English wars; Kirkcaldy, where the witches once prevailed 
extremely and sank tall ships and honest mariners in the North Sea; 
Dysart, famous - well famous at least to me for the Dutch ships 
that lay in its harbour, painted like toys and with pots of flowers 
and cages of song-birds in the cabin windows, and for one 
particular Dutch skipper who would sit all day in slippers on the 
break of the poop, smoking a long German pipe; Wemyss (pronounce 
Weems) with its bat-haunted caves, where the Chevalier Johnstone, 
on his flight from Culloden, passed a night of superstitious 
terrors; Leven, a bald, quite modern place, sacred to summer 
visitors, whence there has gone but yesterday the tall figure and 
the white locks of the last Englishman in Delhi, my uncle Dr. 
Balfour, who was still walking his hospital rounds, while the 
troopers from Meerut clattered and cried "Deen Deen" along the 
streets of the imperial city, and Willoughby mustered his handful 
of heroes at the magazine, and the nameless brave one in the 
telegraph office was perhaps already fingering his last despatch; 
and just a little beyond Leven, Largo Law and the smoke of Largo 
town mounting about its feet, the town of Alexander Selkirk, better 
known under the name of Robinson Crusoe.  So on, the list might be 
pursued (only for private reasons, which the reader will shortly 
have an opportunity to guess) by St. Monance, and Pittenweem, and 
the two Anstruthers, and Cellardyke, and Crail, where Primate 
Sharpe was once a humble and innocent country minister:  on to the 
heel of the land, to Fife Ness, overlooked by a sea-wood of matted 
elders and the quaint old mansion of Balcomie, itself overlooking 
but the breach or the quiescence of the deep - the Carr Rock beacon 
rising close in front, and as night draws in, the star of the 
Inchcape reef springing up on the one hand, and the star of the May 
Island on the other, and farther off yet a third and a greater on 
the craggy foreland of St. Abb's.  And but a little way round the 
corner of the land, imminent itself above the sea, stands the gem 
of the province and the light of mediaeval Scotland, St. Andrews, 
where the great Cardinal Beaton held garrison against the world, 
and the second of the name and title perished (as you may read in 
Knox's jeering narrative) under the knives of true-blue 
Protestants, and to this day (after so many centuries) the current 
voice of the professor is not hushed.

Here it was that my first tour of inspection began, early on a 
bleak easterly morning.  There was a crashing run of sea upon the 
shore, I recollect, and my father and the man of the harbour light 
must sometimes raise their voices to be audible.  Perhaps it is 
from this circumstance, that I always imagine St. Andrews to be an 
ineffectual seat of learning, and the sound of the east wind and 
the bursting surf to linger in its drowsy classrooms and confound 
the utterance of the professor, until teacher and taught are alike 
drowned in oblivion, and only the sea-gull beats on the windows and 
the draught of the sea-air rustles in the pages of the open 
lecture.  But upon all this, and the romance of St. Andrews in 
general, the reader must consult the works of Mr. Andrew Lang; who 
has written of it but the other day in his dainty prose and with 
his incommunicable humour, and long ago in one of his best poems, 
with grace, and local truth, and a note of unaffected pathos.  Mr. 
Lang knows all about the romance, I say, and the educational 
advantages, but I doubt if he had turned his attention to the 
harbour lights; and it may be news even to him, that in the year 
1863 their case was pitiable.  Hanging about with the east wind 
humming in my teeth, and my hands (I make no doubt) in my pockets, 
I looked for the first time upon that tragi-comedy of the visiting 
engineer which I have seen so often re-enacted on a more important 
stage.  Eighty years ago, I find my grandfather writing:  "It is 
the most painful thing that can occur to me to have a 
correspondence of this kind with any of the keepers, and when I 
come to the Light House, instead of having the satisfaction to meet 
them with approbation and welcome their Family, it is distressing 
when one-is obliged to put on a most angry countenance and 
demeanour."  This painful obligation has been hereditary in my 
race.  I have myself, on a perfectly amateur and unauthorised 
inspection of Turnberry Point, bent my brows upon the keeper on the 
question of storm-panes; and felt a keen pang of self-reproach, 
when we went down stairs again and I found he was making a coffin 
for his infant child; and then regained my equanimity with the 
thought that I had done the man a service, and when the proper 
inspector came, he would be readier with his panes.  The human race 
is perhaps credited with more duplicity than it deserves.  The 
visitation of a lighthouse at least is a business of the most 
transparent nature.  As soon as the boat grates on the shore, and 
the keepers step forward in their uniformed coats, the very slouch 
of the fellows' shoulders tells their story, and the engineer may 
begin at once to assume his "angry countenance."  Certainly the 
brass of the handrail will be clouded; and if the brass be not 
immaculate, certainly all will be to match - the reflectors 
scratched, the spare lamp unready, the storm-panes in the 
storehouse.  If a light is not rather more than middling good, it 
will be radically bad.  Mediocrity (except in literature) appears 
to be unattainable by man.  But of course the unfortunate of St. 
Andrews was only an amateur, he was not in the Service, he had no 
uniform coat, he was (I believe) a plumber by his trade and stood 
(in the mediaeval phrase) quite out of the danger of my father; but 
he had a painful interview for all that, and perspired extremely.

From St. Andrews, we drove over Magus Muir.  My father had 
announced we were "to post," and the phrase called up in my hopeful 
mind visions of top-boots and the pictures in Rowlandson's DANCE OF 
DEATH; but it was only a jingling cab that came to the inn door, 
such as I had driven in a thousand times at the low price of one 
shilling on the streets of Edinburgh.  Beyond this disappointment, 
I remember nothing of that drive.  It is a road I have often 
travelled, and of not one of these journeys do I remember any 
single trait.  The fact has not been suffered to encroach on the 
truth of the imagination.  I still see Magus Muir two hundred years 
ago; a desert place, quite uninclosed; in the midst, the primate's 
carriage fleeing at the gallop; the assassins loose-reined in 
pursuit, Burley Balfour, pistol in hand, among the first.  No scene 
of history has ever written itself so deeply on my mind; not 
because Balfour, that questionable zealot, was an ancestral cousin 
of my own; not because of the pleadings of the victim and his 
daughter; not even because of the live bum-bee that flew out of 
Sharpe's 'bacco-box, thus clearly indicating his complicity with 
Satan; nor merely because, as it was after all a crime of a fine 
religious flavour, it figured in Sunday books and afforded a 
grateful relief from MINISTERING CHILDREN or the MEMOIRS OF MRS. 
KATHATINE WINSLOWE.  The figure that always fixed my attention is 
that of Hackston of Rathillet, sitting in the saddle with his cloak 
about his mouth, and through all that long, bungling, vociferous 
hurly-burly, revolving privately a case of conscience.  He would 
take no hand in the deed, because he had a private spite against 
the victim, and "that action" must be sullied with no suggestion of 
a worldly motive; on the other hand, "that action," in itself, was 
highly justified, he had cast in his lot with "the actors," and he 
must stay there, inactive but publicly sharing the responsibility.  
"You are a gentleman - you will protect me!" cried the wounded old 
man, crawling towards him.  "I will never lay a hand on you," said 
Hackston, and put his cloak about his mouth.  It is an old 
temptation with me, to pluck away that cloak and see the face - to 
open that bosom and to read the heart.  With incomplete romances 
about Hackston, the drawers of my youth were lumbered.  I read him 
up in every printed book that I could lay my hands on.  I even dug 
among the Wodrow manuscripts, sitting shame-faced in the very room 
where my hero had been tortured two centuries before, and keenly 
conscious of my youth in the midst of other and (as I fondly 
thought) more gifted students.  All was vain:  that he had passed a 
riotous nonage, that he was a zealot, that he twice displayed 
(compared with his grotesque companions) some tincture of soldierly 
resolution and even of military common sense, and that he figured 
memorably in the scene on Magus Muir, so much and no more could I 
make out.  But whenever I cast my eyes backward, it is to see him 
like a landmark on the plains of history, sitting with his cloak 
about his mouth, inscrutable.  How small a thing creates an 
immortality!  I do not think he can have been a man entirely 
commonplace; but had he not thrown his cloak about his mouth, or 
had the witnesses forgot to chronicle the action, he would not thus 
have haunted the imagination of my boyhood, and to-day he would 
scarce delay me for a paragraph.  An incident, at once romantic and 
dramatic, which at once awakes the judgment and makes a picture for 
the eye, how little do we realise its perdurable power!  Perhaps no 
one does so but the author, just as none but he appreciates the 
influence of jingling words; so that he looks on upon life, with 
something of a covert smile, seeing people led by what they fancy 
to be thoughts and what are really the accustomed artifices of his 
own trade, or roused by what they take to be principles and are 
really picturesque effects.  In a pleasant book about a school-
class club, Colonel Fergusson has recently told a little anecdote.  
A "Philosophical Society" was formed by some Academy boys - among 
them, Colonel Fergusson himself, Fleeming Jenkin, and Andrew 
Wilson, the Christian Buddhist and author of THE ABODE OF SNOW.  
Before these learned pundits, one member laid the following 
ingenious problem:  "What would be the result of putting a pound of 
potassium in a pot of porter?"  "I should think there would be a 
number of interesting bi-products," said a smatterer at my elbow; 
but for me the tale itself has a bi-product, and stands as a type 
of much that is most human.  For this inquirer who conceived 
himself to burn with a zeal entirely chemical, was really immersed 
in a design of a quite different nature; unconsciously to his own 
recently breeched intelligence, he was engaged in literature.  
Putting, pound, potassium, pot, porter; initial p, mediant t - that 
was his idea, poor little boy!  So with politics and that which 
excites men in the present, so with history and that which rouses 
them in the past:  there lie at the root of what appears, most 
serious unsuspected elements.

The triple town of Anstruther Wester, Anstruther Easter, and 
Cellardyke, all three Royal Burghs - or two Royal Burghs and a less 
distinguished suburb, I forget which - lies continuously along the 
seaside, and boasts of either two or three separate parish 
churches, and either two or three separate harbours.  These 
ambiguities are painful; but the fact is (although it argue me 
uncultured), I am but poorly posted upon Cellardyke.  My business 
lay in the two Anstruthers.  A tricklet of a stream divides them, 
spanned by a bridge; and over the bridge at the time of my 
knowledge, the celebrated Shell House stood outpost on the west.  
This had been the residence of an agreeable eccentric; during his 
fond tenancy, he had illustrated the outer walls, as high (if I 
remember rightly) as the roof, with elaborate patterns and 
pictures, and snatches of verse in the vein of EXEGI MONUMENTUM; 
shells and pebbles, artfully contrasted and conjoined, had been his 
medium; and I like to think of him standing back upon the bridge, 
when all was finished, drinking in the general effect and (like 
Gibbon) already lamenting his employment.

The same bridge saw another sight in the seventeenth century.  Mr. 
Thomson, the "curat" of Anstruther Easter, was a man highly 
obnoxious to the devout:  in the first place, because he was a 
"curat"; in the second place, because he was a person of irregular 
and scandalous life; and in the third place, because he was 
generally suspected of dealings with the Enemy of Man.  These three 
disqualifications, in the popular literature of the time, go hand 
in hand; but the end of Mr. Thomson was a thing quite by itself, 
and in the proper phrase, a manifest judgment.  He had been at a 
friend's house in Anstruther Wester, where (and elsewhere, I 
suspect) he had partaken of the bottle; indeed, to put the thing in 
our cold modern way, the reverend gentleman was on the brink of 
DELIRIUM TREMENS.  It was a dark night, it seems; a little lassie 
came carrying a lantern to fetch the curate home; and away they 
went down the street of Anstruther Wester, the lantern swinging a 
bit in the child's hand, the barred lustre tossing up and down 
along the front of slumbering houses, and Mr. Thomson not 
altogether steady on his legs nor (to all appearance) easy in his 
mind.  The pair had reached the middle of the bridge when (as I 
conceive the scene) the poor tippler started in some baseless fear 
and looked behind him; the child, already shaken by the minister's 
strange behaviour, started also; in so doing, she would jerk the 
lantern; and for the space of a moment the lights and the shadows 
would be all confounded.  Then it was that to the unhinged toper 
and the twittering child, a huge bulk of blackness seemed to sweep 
down, to pass them close by as they stood upon the bridge, and to 
vanish on the farther side in the general darkness of the night.  
"Plainly the devil come for Mr. Thomson!" thought the child.  What 
Mr. Thomson thought himself, we have no ground of knowledge; but he 
fell upon his knees in the midst of the bridge like a man praying.  
On the rest of the journey to the manse, history is silent; but 
when they came to the door, the poor caitiff, taking the lantern 
from the child, looked upon her with so lost a countenance that her 
little courage died within her, and she fled home screaming to her 
parents.  Not a soul would venture out; all that night, the 
minister dwelt alone with his terrors in the manse; and when the 
day dawned, and men made bold to go about the streets, they found 
the devil had come indeed for Mr. Thomson.

This manse of Anstruther Easter has another and a more cheerful 
association.  It was early in the morning, about a century before 
the days of Mr. Thomson, that his predecessor was called out of bed 
to welcome a Grandee of Spain, the Duke of Medina Sidonia, just 
landed in the harbour underneath.  But sure there was never seen a 
more decayed grandee; sure there was never a duke welcomed from a 
stranger place of exile.  Half-way between Orkney and Shetland, 
there lies a certain isle; on the one hand the Atlantic, on the 
other the North Sea, bombard its pillared cliffs; sore-eyed, short-
living, inbred fishers and their families herd in its few huts; in 
the graveyard pieces of wreck-wood stand for monuments; there is 
nowhere a more inhospitable spot.  BELLE-ISLE-EN-MER - Fair-Isle-
at-Sea - that is a name that has always rung in my mind's ear like 
music; but the only "Fair Isle" on which I ever set my foot, was 
this unhomely, rugged turret-top of submarine sierras.  Here, when 
his ship was broken, my lord Duke joyfully got ashore; here for 
long months he and certain of his men were harboured; and it was 
from this durance that he landed at last to be welcomed (as well as 
such a papist deserved, no doubt) by the godly incumbent of 
Anstruther Easter; and after the Fair Isle, what a fine city must 
that have appeared! and after the island diet, what a hospitable 
spot the minister's table!  And yet he must have lived on friendly 
terms with his outlandish hosts.  For to this day there still 
survives a relic of the long winter evenings when the sailors of 
the great Armada crouched about the hearths of the Fair-Islanders, 
the planks of their own lost galleon perhaps lighting up the scene, 
and the gale and the surf that beat about the coast contributing 
their melancholy voices.  All the folk of the north isles are great 
artificers of knitting:  the Fair-Islanders alone dye their fabrics 
in the Spanish manner.  To this day, gloves and nightcaps, 
innocently decorated, may be seen for sale in the Shetland 
warehouse at Edinburgh, or on the Fair Isle itself in the 
catechist's house; and to this day, they tell the story of the Duke 
of Medina Sidonia's adventure.

It would seem as if the Fair Isle had some attraction for "persons 
of quality."  When I landed there myself, an elderly gentleman, 
unshaved, poorly attired, his shoulders wrapped in a plaid, was 
seen walking to and fro, with a book in his hand, upon the beach.  
He paid no heed to our arrival, which we thought a strange thing in 
itself; but when one of the officers of the PHAROS, passing 
narrowly by him, observed his book to be a Greek Testament, our 
wonder and interest took a higher flight.  The catechist was cross-
examined; he said the gentleman had been put across some time 
before in Mr. Bruce of Sumburgh's schooner, the only link between 
the Fair Isle and the rest of the world; and that he held services 
and was doing "good."  So much came glibly enough; but when pressed 
a little farther, the catechist displayed embarrassment.  A 
singular diffidence appeared upon his face:  "They tell me," said 
he, in low tones, "that he's a lord."  And a lord he was; a peer of 
the realm pacing that inhospitable beach with his Greek Testament, 
and his plaid about his shoulders, set upon doing good, as he 
understood it, worthy man!  And his grandson, a good-looking little 
boy, much better dressed than the lordly evangelist, and speaking 
with a silken English accent very foreign to the scene, accompanied 
me for a while in my exploration of the island.  I suppose this 
little fellow is now my lord, and wonder how much he remembers of 
the Fair Isle.  Perhaps not much; for he seemed to accept very 
quietly his savage situation; and under such guidance, it is like 
that this was not his first nor yet his last adventure.



CHAPTER VI - RANDOM MEMORIES



II. - THE EDUCATION OF AN ENGINEER


ANSTRUTHER is a place sacred to the Muse; she inspired (really to a 
considerable extent) Tennant's vernacular poem ANST'ER FAIR; and I 
have there waited upon her myself with much devotion.  This was 
when I came as a young man to glean engineering experience from the 
building of the breakwater.  What I gleaned, I am sure I do not 
know; but indeed I had already my own private determination to be 
an author; I loved the art of words and the appearances of life; 
and TRAVELLERS, and HEADERS, and RUBBLE, and POLISHED ASHLAR, and 
PIERRES PERDUES, and even the thrilling question of the STRING-
COURSE, interested me only (if they interested me at all) as 
properties for some possible romance or as words to add to my 
vocabulary.  To grow a little catholic is the compensation of 
years; youth is one-eyed; and in those days, though I haunted the 
breakwater by day, and even loved the place for the sake of the 
sunshine, the thrilling seaside air, the wash of waves on the sea-
face, the green glimmer of the divers' helmets far below, and the 
musical chinking of the masons, my one genuine preoccupation lay 
elsewhere, and my only industry was in the hours when I was not on 
duty.  I lodged with a certain Bailie Brown, a carpenter by trade; 
and there, as soon as dinner was despatched, in a chamber scented 
with dry rose-leaves, drew in my chair to the table and proceeded 
to pour forth literature, at such a speed, and with such 
intimations of early death and immortality, as I now look back upon 
with wonder.  Then it was that I wrote VOCES FIDELIUM, a series of 
dramatic monologues in verse; then that I indited the bulk of a 
covenanting novel - like so many others, never finished.  Late I 
sat into the night, toiling (as I thought) under the very dart of 
death, toiling to leave a memory behind me.  I feel moved to thrust 
aside the curtain of the years, to hail that poor feverish idiot, 
to bid him go to bed and clap VOCES FIDELIUM on the fire before he 
goes; so clear does he appear before me, sitting there between his 
candles in the rose-scented room and the late night; so ridiculous 
a picture (to my elderly wisdom) does the fool present!  But he was 
driven to his bed at last without miraculous intervention; and the 
manner of his driving sets the last touch upon this eminently 
youthful business.  The weather was then so warm that I must keep 
the windows open; the night without was populous with moths.  As 
the late darkness deepened, my literary tapers beaconed forth more 
brightly; thicker and thicker came the dusty night-fliers, to 
gyrate for one brilliant instant round the flame and fall in 
agonies upon my paper.  Flesh and blood could not endure the 
spectacle; to capture immortality was doubtless a noble enterprise, 
but not to capture it at such a cost of suffering; and out would go 
the candles, and off would I go to bed in the darkness raging to 
think that the blow might fall on the morrow, and there was VOCES 
FIDELIUM still incomplete.  Well, the moths are - all gone, and 
VOCES FIDELIUM along with them; only the fool is still on hand and 
practises new follies.

Only one thing in connection with the harbour tempted me, and that 
was the diving, an experience I burned to taste of.  But this was 
not to be, at least in Anstruther; and the subject involves a 
change of scene to the sub-arctic town of Wick.  You can never have 
dwelt in a country more unsightly than that part of Caithness, the 
land faintly swelling, faintly falling, not a tree, not a hedgerow, 
the fields divided by single slate stones set upon their edge, the 
wind always singing in your ears and (down the long road that led 
nowhere) thrumming in the telegraph wires.  Only as you approached 
the coast was there anything to stir the heart.  The plateau broke 
down to the North Sea in formidable cliffs, the tall out-stacks 
rose like pillars ringed about with surf, the coves were over-
brimmed with clamorous froth, the sea-birds screamed, the wind sang 
in the thyme on the cliff's edge; here and there, small ancient 
castles toppled on the brim; here and there, it was possible to dip 
into a dell of shelter, where you might lie and tell yourself you 
were a little warm, and hear (near at hand) the whin-pods bursting 
in the afternoon sun, and (farther off) the rumour of the turbulent 
sea.  As for Wick itself, it is one of the meanest of man's towns, 
and situate certainly on the baldest of God's bays.  It lives for 
herring, and a strange sight it is to see (of an afternoon) the 
heights of Pulteney blackened by seaward-looking fishers, as when a 
city crowds to a review - or, as when bees have swarmed, the ground 
is horrible with lumps and clusters; and a strange sight, and a 
beautiful, to see the fleet put silently out against a rising moon, 
the sea-line rough as a wood with sails, and ever and again and one 
after another, a boat flitting swiftly by the silver disk.  This 
mass of fishers, this great fleet of boats, is out of all 
proportion to the town itself; and the oars are manned and the nets 
hauled by immigrants from the Long Island (as we call the outer 
Hebrides), who come for that season only, and depart again, if "the 
take" be poor, leaving debts behind them.  In a bad year, the end 
of the herring fishery is therefore an exciting time; fights are 
common, riots often possible; an apple knocked from a child's hand 
was once the signal for something like a war; and even when I was 
there, a gunboat lay in the bay to assist the authorities.  To 
contrary interests, it should be observed, the curse of Babel is 
here added; the Lews men are Gaelic speakers.  Caithness has 
adopted English; an odd circumstance, if you reflect that both must 
be largely Norsemen by descent.  I remember seeing one of the 
strongest instances of this division:  a thing like a Punch-and-
Judy box erected on the flat grave-stones of the churchyard; from 
the hutch or proscenium - I know not what to call it - an eldritch-
looking preacher laying down the law in Gaelic about some one of 
the name of POWL, whom I at last divined to be the apostle to the 
Gentiles; a large congregation of the Lews men very devoutly 
listening; and on the outskirts of the crowd, some of the town's 
children (to whom the whole affair was Greek and Hebrew) profanely 
playing tigg.  The same descent, the same country, the same narrow 
sect of the same religion, and all these bonds made very largely 
nugatory by an accidental difference of dialect!

Into the bay of Wick stretched the dark length of the unfinished 
breakwater, in its cage of open staging; the travellers (like 
frames of churches) over-plumbing all; and away at the extreme end, 
the divers toiling unseen on the foundation.  On a platform of 
loose planks, the assistants turned their air-mills; a stone might 
be swinging between wind and water; underneath the swell ran gaily; 
and from time to time, a mailed dragon with a window-glass snout 
came dripping up the ladder.  Youth is a blessed season after all; 
my stay at Wick was in the year of VOCES FIDELIUM and the rose-leaf 
room at Bailie Brown's; and already I did not care two straws for 
literary glory.  Posthumous ambition perhaps requires an atmosphere 
of roses; and the more rugged excitant of Wick east winds had made 
another boy of me.  To go down in the diving-dress, that was my 
absorbing fancy; and with the countenance of a certain handsome 
scamp of a diver, Bob Bain by name, I gratified the whim.

It was gray, harsh, easterly weather, the swell ran pretty high, 
and out in the open there were "skipper's daughters," when I found 
myself at last on the diver's platform, twenty pounds of lead upon 
each foot and my whole person swollen with ply and ply of woollen 
underclothing.  One moment, the salt wind was whistling round my 
night-capped head; the next, I was crushed almost double under the 
weight of the helmet.  As that intolerable burthern was laid upon 
me, I could have found it in my heart (only for shame's sake) to 
cry off from the whole enterprise.  But it was too late.  The 
attendants began to turn the hurdy-gurdy, and the air to whistle 
through the tube; some one screwed in the barred window of the 
vizor; and I was cut off in a moment from my fellow-men; standing 
there in their midst, but quite divorced from intercourse:  a 
creature deaf and dumb, pathetically looking forth upon them from a 
climate of his own.  Except that I could move and feel, I was like 
a man fallen in a catalepsy.  But time was scarce given me to 
realise my isolation; the weights were hung upon my back and 
breast, the signal rope was thrust into my unresisting hand; and 
setting a twenty-pound foot upon the ladder, I began ponderously to 
descend.

Some twenty rounds below the platform, twilight fell.  Looking up, 
I saw a low green heaven mottled with vanishing bells of white; 
looking around, except for the weedy spokes and shafts of the 
ladder, nothing but a green gloaming, somewhat opaque but very 
restful and delicious.  Thirty rounds lower, I stepped off on the 
PIERRES PERDUES of the foundation; a dumb helmeted figure took me 
by the hand, and made a gesture (as I read it) of encouragement; 
and looking in at the creature's window, I beheld the face of Bain.  
There we were, hand to hand and (when it pleased us) eye to eye; 
and either might have burst himself with shouting, and not a 
whisper come to his companion's hearing.  Each, in his own little 
world of air, stood incommunicably separate.

Bob had told me ere this a little tale, a five minutes' drama at 
the bottom of the sea, which at that moment possibly shot across my 
mind.  He was down with another, settling a stone of the sea-wall.  
They had it well adjusted, Bob gave the signal, the scissors were 
slipped, the stone set home; and it was time to turn to something 
else.  But still his companion remained bowed over the block like a 
mourner on a tomb, or only raised himself to make absurd 
contortions and mysterious signs unknown to the vocabulary of the 
diver.  There, then, these two stood for awhile, like the dead and 
the living; till there flashed a fortunate thought into Bob's mind, 
and he stooped, peered through the window of that other world, and 
beheld the face of its inhabitant wet with streaming tears.  Ah! 
the man was in pain!  And Bob, glancing downward, saw what was the 
trouble:  the block had been lowered on the foot of that 
unfortunate - he was caught alive at the bottom of the sea under 
fifteen tons of rock.

That two men should handle a stone so heavy, even swinging in the 
scissors, may appear strange to the inexpert.  These must bear in 
mind the great density of the water of the sea, and the surprising 
results of transplantation to that medium.  To understand a little 
what these are, and how a man's weight, so far from being an 
encumbrance, is the very ground of his agility, was the chief 
lesson of my submarine experience.  The knowledge came upon me by 
degrees.  As I began to go forward with the hand of my estranged 
companion, a world of tumbled stones was visible, pillared with the 
weedy uprights of the staging:  overhead, a flat roof of green:  a 
little in front, the sea-wall, like an unfinished rampart.  And 
presently in our upward progress, Bob motioned me to leap upon a 
stone; I looked to see if he were possibly in earnest, and he only 
signed to me the more imperiously.  Now the block stood six feet 
high; it would have been quite a leap to me unencumbered; with the 
breast and back weights, and the twenty pounds upon each foot, and 
the staggering load of the helmet, the thing was out of reason.  I 
laughed aloud in my tomb; and to prove to Bob how far he was 
astray, I gave a little impulse from my toes.  Up I soared like a 
bird, my companion soaring at my side.  As high as to the stone, 
and then higher, I pursued my impotent and empty flight.  Even when 
the strong arm of Bob had checked my shoulders, my heels continued 
their ascent; so that I blew out sideways like an autumn leaf, and 
must be hauled in, hand over hand, as sailors haul in the slack of 
a sail, and propped upon my feet again like an intoxicated sparrow.  
Yet a little higher on the foundation, and we began to be affected 
by the bottom of the swell, running there like a strong breeze of 
wind.  Or so I must suppose; for, safe in my cushion of air, I was 
conscious of no impact; only swayed idly like a weed, and was now 
borne helplessly abroad, and now swiftly - and yet with dream-like 
gentleness - impelled against my guide.  So does a child's balloon 
divagate upon the currents of the air, and touch, and slide off 
again from every obstacle.  So must have ineffectually swung, so 
resented their inefficiency, those light crowds that followed the 
Star of Hades, and uttered exiguous voices in the land beyond 
Cocytus.

There was something strangely exasperating, as well as strangely 
wearying, in these uncommanded evolutions.  It is bitter to return 
to infancy, to be supported, and directed, and perpetually set upon 
your feet, by the hand of some one else.  The air besides, as it is 
supplied to you by the busy millers on the platform, closes the 
eustachian tubes and keeps the neophyte perpetually swallowing, 
till his throat is grown so dry that he can swallow no longer.  And 
for all these reasons-although I had a fine, dizzy, muddle-headed 
joy in my surroundings, and longed, and tried, and always failed, 
to lay hands on the fish that darted here and there about me, swift 
as humming-birds - yet I fancy I was rather relieved than otherwise 
when Bain brought me back to the ladder and signed to me to mount.  
And there was one more experience before me even then.  Of a 
sudden, my ascending head passed into the trough of a swell.  Out 
of the green, I shot at once into a glory of rosy, almost of 
sanguine light - the multitudinous seas incarnadined, the heaven 
above a vault of crimson.  And then the glory faded into the hard, 
ugly daylight of a Caithness autumn, with a low sky, a gray sea, 
and a whistling wind.

Bob Bain had five shillings for his trouble, and I had done what I 
desired.  It was one of the best things I got from my education as 
an engineer:  of which, however, as a way of life, I wish to speak 
with sympathy.  It takes a man into the open air; it keeps him 
hanging about harbour-sides, which is the richest form of idling; 
it carries him to wild islands; it gives him a taste of the genial 
dangers of the sea; it supplies him with dexterities to exercise; 
it makes demands upon his ingenuity; it will go far to cure him of 
any taste (if ever he had one) for the miserable life of cities.  
And when it has done so, it carries him back and shuts him in an 
office!  From the roaring skerry and the wet thwart of the tossing 
boat, he passes to the stool and desk; and with a memory full of 
ships, and seas, and perilous headlands, and the shining pharos, he 
must apply his long-sighted eyes to the petty niceties of drawing, 
or measure his inaccurate mind with several pages of consecutive 
figures.  He is a wise youth, to be sure, who can balance one part 
of genuine life against two parts of drudgery between four walls, 
and for the sake of the one, manfully accept the other.

Wick was scarce an eligible place of stay.  But how much better it 
was to hang in the cold wind upon the pier, to go down with Bob 
Bain among the roots of the staging, to be all day in a boat 
coiling a wet rope and shouting orders - not always very wise - 
than to be warm and dry, and dull, and dead-alive, in the most 
comfortable office.  And Wick itself had in those days a note of 
originality.  It may have still, but I misdoubt it much.  The old 
minister of Keiss would not preach, in these degenerate times, for 
an hour and a half upon the clock.  The gipsies must be gone from 
their cavern; where you might see, from the mouth, the women 
tending their fire, like Meg Merrilies, and the men sleeping off 
their coarse potations; and where, in winter gales, the surf would 
beleaguer them closely, bursting in their very door.  A traveller 
to-day upon the Thurso coach would scarce observe a little cloud of 
smoke among the moorlands, and be told, quite openly, it marked a 
private still.  He would not indeed make that journey, for there is 
now no Thurso coach.  And even if he could, one little thing that 
happened to me could never happen to him, or not with the same 
trenchancy of contrast.

We had been upon the road all evening; the coach-top was crowded 
with Lews fishers going home, scarce anything but Gaelic had 
sounded in my ears; and our way had lain throughout over a moorish 
country very northern to behold.  Latish at night, though it was 
still broad day in our subarctic latitude, we came down upon the 
shores of the roaring Pentland Firth, that grave of mariners; on 
one hand, the cliffs of Dunnet Head ran seaward; in front was the 
little bare, white town of Castleton, its streets full of blowing 
sand; nothing beyond, but the North Islands, the great deep, and 
the perennial ice-fields of the Pole.  And here, in the last 
imaginable place, there sprang up young outlandish voices and a 
chatter of some foreign speech; and I saw, pursuing the coach with 
its load of Hebridean fishers - as they had pursued VETTURINI up 
the passes of the Apennines or perhaps along the grotto under 
Virgil's tomb - two little dark-eyed, white-toothed Italian 
vagabonds, of twelve to fourteen years of age, one with a hurdy-
gurdy, the other with a cage of white mice.  The coach passed on, 
and their small Italian chatter died in the distance; and I was 
left to marvel how they had wandered into that country, and how 
they fared in it, and what they thought of it, and when (if ever) 
they should see again the silver wind-breaks run among the olives, 
and the stone-pine stand guard upon Etruscan sepulchres.

Upon any American, the strangeness of this incident is somewhat 
lost.  For as far back as he goes in his own land, he will find 
some alien camping there; the Cornish miner, the French or Mexican 
half-blood, the negro in the South, these are deep in the woods and 
far among the mountains.  But in an old, cold, and rugged country 
such as mine, the days of immigration are long at an end; and away 
up there, which was at that time far beyond the northernmost 
extreme of railways, hard upon the shore of that ill-omened strait 
of whirlpools, in a land of moors where no stranger came, unless it 
should be a sportsman to shoot grouse or an antiquary to decipher 
runes, the presence of these small pedestrians struck the mind as 
though a bird-of-paradise had risen from the heather or an 
albatross come fishing in the bay of Wick.  They were as strange to 
their surroundings as my lordly evangelist or the old Spanish 
grandee on the Fair Isle.



CHAPTER VII - THE LANTERN-BEARERS



I


THESE boys congregated every autumn about a certain easterly 
fisher-village, where they tasted in a high degree the glory of 
existence.  The place was created seemingly on purpose for the 
diversion of young gentlemen.  A street or two of houses, mostly 
red and many of, them tiled; a number of fine trees clustered about 
the manse and the kirkyard, and turning the chief street into a 
shady alley; many little gardens more than usually bright with 
flowers; nets a-drying, and fisher-wives scolding in the backward 
parts; a smell of fish, a genial smell of seaweed; whiffs of 
blowing sand at the street-corners; shops with golf-balls and 
bottled lollipops; another shop with penny pickwicks (that 
remarkable cigar) and the LONDON JOURNAL, dear to me for its 
startling pictures, and a few novels, dear for their suggestive 
names:  such, as well as memory serves me, were the ingredients of 
the town.  These, you are to conceive posted on a spit between two 
sandy bays, and sparsely flanked with villas enough for the boys to 
lodge in with their subsidiary parents, not enough (not yet enough) 
to cocknify the scene:  a haven in the rocks in front:  in front of 
that, a file of gray islets:  to the left, endless links and sand 
wreaths, a wilderness of hiding-holes, alive with popping rabbits 
and soaring gulls:  to the right, a range of seaward crags, one 
rugged brow beyond another; the ruins of a mighty and ancient 
fortress on the brink of one; coves between - now charmed into 
sunshine quiet, now whistling with wind and clamorous with bursting 
surges; the dens and sheltered hollows redolent of thyme and 
southernwood, the air at the cliff's edge brisk and clean and 
pungent of the sea - in front of all, the Bass Rock, tilted seaward 
like a doubtful bather, the surf ringing it with white, the solan-
geese hanging round its summit like a great and glittering smoke.  
This choice piece of seaboard was sacred, besides, to the wrecker; 
and the Bass, in the eye of fancy, still flew the colours of King 
James; and in the ear of fancy the arches of Tantallon still rang 
with horse-shoe iron, and echoed to the commands of Bell-the-Cat.

There was nothing to mar your days, if you were a boy summering in 
that part, but the embarrassment of pleasure.  You might golf if 
you wanted; but I seem to have been better employed.  You might 
secrete yourself in the Lady's Walk, a certain sunless dingle of 
elders, all mossed over by the damp as green as grass, and dotted 
here and there by the stream-side with roofless walls, the cold 
homes of anchorites.  To fit themselves for life, and with a 
special eye to acquire the art of smoking, it was even common for 
the boys to harbour there; and you might have seen a single penny 
pickwick, honestly shared in lengths with a blunt knife, bestrew 
the glen with these apprentices.  Again, you might join our fishing 
parties, where we sat perched as thick as solan-geese, a covey of 
little anglers, boy and girl, angling over each other's heads, to 
the to the much entanglement of lines and loss of podleys and 
consequent shrill recrimination - shrill as the geese themselves.  
Indeed, had that been all, you might have done this often; but 
though fishing be a fine pastime, the podley is scarce to be 
regarded as a dainty for the table; and it was a point of honour 
that a boy should eat all that he had taken.  Or again, you might 
climb the Law, where the whale's jawbone stood landmark in the 
buzzing wind, and behold the face of many counties, and the smoke 
and spires of many towns, and the sails of distant ships.  You 
might bathe, now in the flaws of fine weather, that we pathetically 
call our summer, now in a gale of wind, with the sand scourging 
your bare hide, your clothes thrashing abroad from underneath their 
guardian stone, the froth of the great breakers casting you 
headlong ere it had drowned your knees.  Or you might explore the 
tidal rocks, above all in the ebb of springs, when the very roots 
of the hills were for the nonce discovered; following my leader 
from one group to another, groping in slippery tangle for the wreck 
of ships, wading in pools after the abominable creatures of the 
sea, and ever with an eye cast backward on the march off the tide 
and the menaced line of your retreat.  And then you might go 
Crusoeing, a word that covers all extempore eating in the open air:  
digging perhaps a house under the margin of the links, kindling a 
fire of the sea-ware, and cooking apples there - if they were truly 
apples, for I sometimes suppose the merchant must have played us 
off with some inferior and quite local fruit capable of resolving, 
in the neighbourhood of fire, into mere sand and smoke and iodine; 
or perhaps pushing to Tantallon, you might lunch on sandwiches and 
visions in the grassy court, while the wind hummed in the crumbling 
turrets; or clambering along the coast, eat geans (the worst, I 
must suppose, in Christendom) from an adventurous gean tree that 
had taken root under a cliff, where it was shaken with an ague of 
east wind, and silvered after gales with salt, and grew so foreign 
among its bleak surroundings that to eat of its produce was an 
adventure in itself.

There are mingled some dismal memories with so many that were 
joyous.  Of the fisher-wife, for instance, who had cut her throat 
at Canty Bay; and of how I ran with the other children to the top 
of the Quadrant, and beheld a posse of silent people escorting a 
cart, and on the cart, bound in a chair, her throat bandaged, and 
the bandage all bloody - horror! - the fisher-wife herself, who 
continued thenceforth to hag-ride my thoughts, and even to-day (as 
I recall the scene) darkens daylight.  She was lodged in the little 
old jail in the chief street; but whether or no she died there, 
with a wise terror of the worst, I never inquired.  She had been 
tippling; it was but a dingy tragedy; and it seems strange and hard 
that, after all these years, the poor crazy sinner should be still 
pilloried on her cart in the scrap-book of my memory.  Nor shall I 
readily forget a certain house in the Quadrant where a visitor 
died, and a dark old woman continued to dwell alone with the dead 
body; nor how this old woman conceived a hatred to myself and one 
of my cousins, and in the dread hour of the dusk, as we were 
clambering on the garden-walls, opened a window in that house of 
mortality and cursed us in a shrill voice and with a marrowy choice 
of language.  It was a pair of very colourless urchins that fled 
down the lane from this remarkable experience!  But I recall with a 
more doubtful sentiment, compounded out of fear and exultation, the 
coil of equinoctial tempests; trumpeting squalls, scouring flaws of 
rain; the boats with their reefed lugsails scudding for the harbour 
mouth, where danger lay, for it was hard to make when the wind had 
any east in it; the wives clustered with blowing shawls at the 
pier-head, where (if fate was against them) they might see boat and 
husband and sons - their whole wealth and their whole family - 
engulfed under their eyes; and (what I saw but once) a troop of 
neighbours forcing such an unfortunate homeward, and she squalling 
and battling in their midst, a figure scarcely human, a tragic 
Maenad.

These are things that I recall with interest; but what my memory 
dwells upon the most, I have been all this while withholding.  It 
was a sport peculiar to the place, and indeed to a week or so of 
our two months' holiday there.  Maybe it still flourishes in its 
native spot; for boys and their pastimes are swayed by periodic 
forces inscrutable to man; so that tops and marbles reappear in 
their due season, regular like the sun and moon; and the harmless 
art of knucklebones has seen the fall of the Roman empire and the 
rise of the United States.  It may still flourish in its native 
spot, but nowhere else, I am persuaded; for I tried myself to 
introduce it on Tweedside, and was defeated lamentably; its charm 
being quite local, like a country wine that cannot be exported.

The idle manner of it was this:-

Toward the end of September, when school-time was drawing near and 
the nights were already black, we would begin to sally from our-
respective villas, each equipped with a tin bull's-eye lantern.  
The thing was so well known that it had worn a rut in the commerce 
of Great Britain; and the grocers, about the due time, began to 
garnish their windows with our particular brand of luminary.  We 
wore them buckled to the waist upon a cricket belt, and over them, 
such was the rigour of the game, a buttoned top-coat.  They smelled 
noisomely of blistered tin; they never burned aright, though they 
would always burn our fingers; their use was naught; the pleasure 
of them merely fanciful; and yet a boy with a bull's-eye under his 
top-coat asked for nothing more.  The fishermen used lanterns about 
their boats, and it was from them, I suppose, that we had got the 
hint; but theirs were not bull's-eyes, nor did we ever play at 
being fishermen.  The police carried them at their belts, and we 
had plainly copied them in that; yet we did not pretend to be 
policemen.  Burglars, indeed, we may have had some haunting 
thoughts of; and we had certainly an eye to past ages when lanterns 
were more common, and to certain story-books in which we had found 
them to figure very largely.  But take it for all in all, the 
pleasure of the thing was substantive; and to be a boy with a 
bull's-eye under his top-coat was good enough for us.

When two of these asses met, there would be an anxious "Have you 
got your lantern?" and a gratified "Yes!" That was the shibboleth, 
and very needful too; for, as it was the rule to keep our glory 
contained, none could recognise a lantern-bearer, unless (like the 
polecat) by the smell.  Four or five would sometimes climb into the 
belly of a ten-man lugger, with nothing but the thwarts above them 
- for the cabin was usually locked, or choose out some hollow of 

Back to Full Books