Across The PlainsbyRobert Louis Stevenson







Across The Plains by Robert Louis Stevenson
Scanned and proofed by David Price
ccx074@coventry.ac.uk
Second proof by Margaret Price.




Contents

I.    Across The Plains
II.   The Old Pacific Capital
III.  Fontainebleau
IV.   Epilogue to "An Inland Voyage"
V.    Random Memories
VI.   Random Memories Continued
VII.  The Lantern-bearers
VIII. A Chapter on Dreams
IX.   Beggars
X.    Letter to a Young Gentleman
XI.   Pulvis et Umbra
XII.  A Christmas Sermon



CHAPTER I - ACROSS THE PLAINS



LEAVES FROM THE NOTEBOOK OF AN EMIGRANT BETWEEN NEW YORK AND SAN 
FRANCISCO


MONDAY. - It was, if I remember rightly, five o'clock when we were 
all signalled to be present at the Ferry Depot of the railroad.  An 
emigrant ship had arrived at New York on the Saturday night, 
another on the Sunday morning, our own on Sunday afternoon, a 
fourth early on Monday; and as there is no emigrant train on Sunday 
a great part of the passengers from these four ships was 
concentrated on the train by which I was to travel.  There was a 
babel of bewildered men, women, and children.  The wretched little 
booking-office, and the baggage-room, which was not much larger, 
were crowded thick with emigrants, and were heavy and rank with the 
atmosphere of dripping clothes.  Open carts full of bedding stood 
by the half-hour in the rain.  The officials loaded each other with 
recriminations.  A bearded, mildewed little man, whom I take to 
have been an emigrant agent, was all over the place, his mouth full 
of brimstone, blustering and interfering.  It was plain that the 
whole system, if system there was, had utterly broken down under 
the strain of so many passengers.

My own ticket was given me at once, and an oldish man, who 
preserved his head in the midst of this turmoil, got my baggage 
registered, and counselled me to stay quietly where I was till he 
should give me the word to move.  I had taken along with me a small 
valise, a knapsack, which I carried on my shoulders, and in the bag 
of my railway rug the whole of BANCROFT'S HISTORY OF THE UNITED 
STATES, in six fat volumes.  It was as much as I could carry with 
convenience even for short distances, but it insured me plenty of 
clothing, and the valise was at that moment, and often after, 
useful for a stool.  I am sure I sat for an hour in the baggage-
room, and wretched enough it was; yet, when at last the word was 
passed to me and I picked up my bundles and got under way, it was 
only to exchange discomfort for downright misery and danger.

I followed the porters into a long shed reaching downhill from West 
Street to the river.  It was dark, the wind blew clean through it 
from end to end; and here I found a great block of passengers and 
baggage, hundreds of one and tons of the other.  I feel I shall 
have a difficulty to make myself believed; and certainly the scene 
must have been exceptional, for it was too dangerous for daily 
repetition.  It was a tight jam; there was no fair way through the 
mingled mass of brute and living obstruction.  Into the upper 
skirts of the crowd porters, infuriated by hurry and overwork, 
clove their way with shouts.  I may say that we stood like sheep, 
and that the porters charged among us like so many maddened sheep-
dogs; and I believe these men were no longer answerable for their 
acts.  It mattered not what they were carrying, they drove straight 
into the press, and when they could get no farther, blindly 
discharged their barrowful.  With my own hand, for instance, I 
saved the life of a child as it sat upon its mother's knee, she 
sitting on a box; and since I heard of no accident, I must suppose 
that there were many similar interpositions in the course of the 
evening.  It will give some idea of the state of mind to which we 
were reduced if I tell you that neither the porter nor the mother 
of the child paid the least attention to my act.  It was not till 
some time after that I understood what I had done myself, for to 
ward off heavy boxes seemed at the moment a natural incident of 
human life.  Cold, wet, clamour, dead opposition to progress, such 
as one encounters in an evil dream, had utterly daunted the 
spirits.  We had accepted this purgatory as a child accepts the 
conditions of the world.  For my part, I shivered a little, and my 
back ached wearily; but I believe I had neither a hope nor a fear, 
and all the activities of my nature had become tributary to one 
massive sensation of discomfort.

At length, and after how long an interval I hesitate to guess, the 
crowd began to move, heavily straining through itself.  About the 
same time some lamps were lighted, and threw a sudden flare over 
the shed.  We were being filtered out into the river boat for 
Jersey City.  You may imagine how slowly this filtering proceeded, 
through the dense, choking crush, every one overladen with packages 
or children, and yet under the necessity of fishing out his ticket 
by the way; but it ended at length for me, and I found myself on 
deck under a flimsy awning and with a trifle of elbow-room to 
stretch and breathe in.  This was on the starboard; for the bulk of 
the emigrants stuck hopelessly on the port side, by which we had 
entered.  In vain the seamen shouted to them to move on, and 
threatened them with shipwreck.  These poor people were under a 
spell of stupor, and did not stir a foot.  It rained as heavily as 
ever, but the wind now came in sudden claps and capfuls, not 
without danger to a boat so badly ballasted as ours; and we crept 
over the river in the darkness, trailing one paddle in the water 
like a wounded duck, and passed ever and again by huge, illuminated 
steamers running many knots, and heralding their approach by 
strains of music.  The contrast between these pleasure embarkations 
and our own grim vessel, with her list to port and her freight of 
wet and silent emigrants, was of that glaring description which we 
count too obvious for the purposes of art.

The landing at Jersey City was done in a stampede.  I had a fixed 
sense of calamity, and to judge by conduct, the same persuasion was 
common to us all.  A panic selfishness, like that produced by fear, 
presided over the disorder of our landing.  People pushed, and 
elbowed, and ran, their families following how they could.  
Children fell, and were picked up to be rewarded by a blow.  One 
child, who had lost her parents, screamed steadily and with 
increasing shrillness, as though verging towards a fit; an official 
kept her by him, but no one else seemed so much as to remark her 
distress; and I am ashamed to say that I ran among the rest.  I was 
so weary that I had twice to make a halt and set down my bundles in 
the hundred yards or so between the pier and the railway station, 
so that I was quite wet by the time that I got under cover.  There 
was no waiting-room, no refreshment room; the cars were locked; and 
for at least another hour, or so it seemed, we had to camp upon the 
draughty, gaslit platform.  I sat on my valise, too crushed to 
observe my neighbours; but as they were all cold, and wet, and 
weary, and driven stupidly crazy by the mismanagement to which we 
had been subjected, I believe they can have been no happier than 
myself.  I bought half-a-dozen oranges from a boy, for oranges and 
nuts were the only refection to be had.  As only two of them had 
even a pretence of juice, I threw the other four under the cars, 
and beheld, as in a dream, grown people and children groping on the 
track after my leavings.

At last we were admitted into the cars, utterly dejected, and far 
from dry.  For my own part, I got out a clothes-brush, and brushed 
my trousers as hard as I could till I had dried them and warmed my 
blood into the bargain; but no one else, except my next neighbour 
to whom I lent the brush, appeared to take the least precaution.  
As they were, they composed themselves to sleep.  I had seen the 
lights of Philadelphia, and been twice ordered to change carriages 
and twice countermanded, before I allowed myself to follow their 
example.

TUESDAY. - When I awoke, it was already day; the train was standing 
idle; I was in the last carriage, and, seeing some others strolling 
to and fro about the lines, I opened the door and stepped forth, as 
from a caravan by the wayside.  We were near no station, nor even, 
as far as I could see, within reach of any signal.  A green, open, 
undulating country stretched away upon all sides.  Locust trees and 
a single field of Indian corn gave it a foreign grace and interest; 
but the contours of the land were soft and English.  It was not 
quite England, neither was it quite France; yet like enough either 
to seem natural in my eyes.  And it was in the sky, and not upon 
the earth, that I was surprised to find a change.  Explain it how 
you may, and for my part I cannot explain it at all, the sun rises 
with a different splendour in America and Europe.  There is more 
clear gold and scarlet in our old country mornings; more purple, 
brown, and smoky orange in those of the new.  It may be from habit, 
but to me the coming of day is less fresh and inspiriting in the 
latter; it has a duskier glory, and more nearly resembles sunset; 
it seems to fit some subsequential, evening epoch of the world, as 
though America were in fact, and not merely in fancy, farther from 
the orient of Aurora and the springs of day.  I thought so then, by 
the railroad side in Pennsylvania, and I have thought so a dozen 
times since in far distant parts of the continent.  If it be an 
illusion it is one very deeply rooted, and in which my eyesight is 
accomplice.

Soon after a train whisked by, announcing and accompanying its 
passage by the swift beating of a sort of chapel bell upon the 
engine; and as it was for this we had been waiting, we were 
summoned by the cry of "All aboard!" and went on again upon our 
way.  The whole line, it appeared, was topsy-turvy; an accident at 
midnight having thrown all the traffic hours into arrear.  We paid 
for this in the flesh, for we had no meals all that day.  Fruit we 
could buy upon the cars; and now and then we had a few minutes at 
some station with a meagre show of rolls and sandwiches for sale; 
but we were so many and so ravenous that, though I tried at every 
opportunity, the coffee was always exhausted before I could elbow 
my way to the counter.

Our American sunrise had ushered in a noble summer's day.  There 
was not a cloud; the sunshine was baking; yet in the woody river 
valleys among which we wound our way, the atmosphere preserved a 
sparkling freshness till late in the afternoon.  It had an inland 
sweetness and variety to one newly from the sea; it smelt of woods, 
rivers, and the delved earth.  These, though in so far a country, 
were airs from home.  I stood on the platform by the hour; and as I 
saw, one after another, pleasant villages, carts upon the highway 
and fishers by the stream, and heard cockcrows and cheery voices in 
the distance, and beheld the sun, no longer shining blankly on the 
plains of ocean, but striking among shapely hills and his light 
dispersed and coloured by a thousand accidents of form and surface, 
I began to exult with myself upon this rise in life like a man who 
had come into a rich estate.  And when I had asked the name of a 
river from the brakesman, and heard that it was called the 
Susquehanna, the beauty of the name seemed to be part and parcel of 
the beauty of the land.  As when Adam with divine fitness named the 
creatures, so this word Susquehanna was at once accepted by the 
fancy.  That was the name, as no other could be, for that shining 
river and desirable valley.

None can care for literature in itself who do not take a special 
pleasure in the sound of names; and there is no part of the world 
where nomenclature is so rich, poetical, humorous, and picturesque 
as the United States of America.  All times, races, and languages 
have brought their contribution.  Pekin is in the same State with 
Euclid, with Bellefontaine, and with Sandusky.  Chelsea, with its 
London associations of red brick, Sloane Square, and the King's 
Road, is own suburb to stately and primeval Memphis; there they 
have their seat, translated names of cities, where the Mississippi 
runs by Tennessee and Arkansas; and both, while I was crossing the 
continent, lay, watched by armed men, in the horror and isolation 
of a plague.  Old, red Manhattan lies, like an Indian arrowhead 
under a steam factory, below anglified New York.  The names of the 
States and Territories themselves form a chorus of sweet and most 
romantic vocables:  Delaware, Ohio, Indiana, Florida, Dakota, Iowa, 
Wyoming, Minnesota, and the Carolinas; there are few poems with a 
nobler music for the ear:  a songful, tuneful land; and if the new 
Homer shall arise from the Western continent, his verse will be 
enriched, his pages sing spontaneously, with the names of states 
and cities that would strike the fancy in a business circular.

Late in the evening we were landed in a waiting-room at Pittsburg.  
I had now under my charge a young and sprightly Dutch widow with 
her children; these I was to watch over providentially for a 
certain distance farther on the way; but as I found she was 
furnished with a basket of eatables, I left her in the waiting-room 
to seek a dinner for myself.  I mention this meal, not only because 
it was the first of which I had partaken for about thirty hours, 
but because it was the means of my first introduction to a coloured 
gentleman.  He did me the honour to wait upon me after a fashion, 
while I was eating; and with every word, look, and gesture marched 
me farther into the country of surprise.  He was indeed strikingly 
unlike the negroes of Mrs. Beecher Stowe, or the Christy Minstrels 
of my youth.  Imagine a gentleman, certainly somewhat dark, but of 
a pleasant warm hue, speaking English with a slight and rather odd 
foreign accent, every inch a man of the world, and armed with 
manners so patronisingly superior that I am at a loss to name their 
parallel in England.  A butler perhaps rides as high over the 
unbutlered, but then he sets you right with a reserve and a sort of 
sighing patience which one is often moved to admire.  And again, 
the abstract butler never stoops to familiarity.  But the coloured 
gentleman will pass you a wink at a time; he is familiar like an 
upper form boy to a fag; he unbends to you like Prince Hal with 
Poins and Falstaff.  He makes himself at home and welcome.  Indeed, 
I may say, this waiter behaved himself to me throughout that supper 
much as, with us, a young, free, and not very self-respecting 
master might behave to a good-looking chambermaid.  I had come 
prepared to pity the poor negro, to put him at his ease, to prove 
in a thousand condescensions that I was no sharer in the prejudice 
of race; but I assure you I put my patronage away for another 
occasion, and had the grace to be pleased with that result.

Seeing he was a very honest fellow, I consulted him upon a point of 
etiquette:  if one should offer to tip the American waiter?  
Certainly not, he told me.  Never.  It would not do.  They 
considered themselves too highly to accept.  They would even resent 
the offer.  As for him and me, we had enjoyed a very pleasant 
conversation; he, in particular, had found much pleasure in my 
society; I was a stranger; this was exactly one of those rare 
conjunctures....  Without being very clear seeing, I can still 
perceive the sun at noonday; and the coloured gentleman deftly 
pocketed a quarter.

WEDNESDAY. - A little after midnight I convoyed my widow and 
orphans on board the train; and morning found us far into Ohio.  
This had early been a favourite home of my imagination; I have 
played at being in Ohio by the week, and enjoyed some capital sport 
there with a dummy gun, my person being still unbreeched.  My 
preference was founded on a work which appeared in CASSELL'S FAMILY 
PAPER, and was read aloud to me by my nurse.  It narrated the 
doings of one Custaloga, an Indian brave, who, in the last chapter, 
very obligingly washed the paint off his face and became Sir 
Reginald Somebody-or-other; a trick I never forgave him.  The idea 
of a man being an Indian brave, and then giving that up to be a 
baronet, was one which my mind rejected.  It offended 
verisimilitude, like the pretended anxiety of Robinson Crusoe and 
others to escape from uninhabited islands.

But Ohio was not at all as I had pictured it.  We were now on those 
great plains which stretch unbroken to the Rocky Mountains.  The 
country was flat like Holland, but far from being dull.  All 
through Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Iowa, or for as much as I saw 
of them from the train and in my waking moments, it was rich and 
various, and breathed an elegance peculiar to itself.  The tall 
corn pleased the eye; the trees were graceful in themselves, and 
framed the plain into long, aerial vistas; and the clean, bright, 
gardened townships spoke of country fare and pleasant summer 
evenings on the stoop.  It was a sort of flat paradise; but, I am 
afraid, not unfrequented by the devil.  That morning dawned with 
such a freezing chill as I have rarely felt; a chill that was not 
perhaps so measurable by instrument, as it struck home upon the 
heart and seemed to travel with the blood.  Day came in with a 
shudder.  White mists lay thinly over the surface of the plain, as 
we see them more often on a lake; and though the sun had soon 
dispersed and drunk them up, leaving an atmosphere of fever heat 
and crystal pureness from horizon to horizon, the mists had still 
been there, and we knew that this paradise was haunted by killing 
damps and foul malaria.  The fences along the line bore but two 
descriptions of advertisement; one to recommend tobaccos, and the 
other to vaunt remedies against the ague.  At the point of day, and 
while we were all in the grasp of that first chill, a native of the 
state, who had got in at some way station, pronounced it, with a 
doctoral air, "a fever and ague morning."

The Dutch widow was a person of some character.  She had conceived 
at first sight a great aversion for the present writer, which she 
was at no pains to conceal.  But being a woman of a practical 
spirit, she made no difficulty about accepting my attentions, and 
encouraged me to buy her children fruits and candies, to carry all 
her parcels, and even to sleep upon the floor that she might profit 
by my empty seat.  Nay, she was such a rattle by nature, and, so 
powerfully moved to autobiographical talk, that she was forced, for 
want of a better, to take me into confidence and tell me the story 
of her life.  I heard about her late husband, who seemed to have 
made his chief impression by taking her out pleasuring on Sundays.  
I could tell you her prospects, her hopes, the amount of her 
fortune, the cost of her housekeeping by the week, and a variety of 
particular matters that are not usually disclosed except to 
friends.  At one station, she shook up her children to look at a 
man on the platform and say if he were not like Mr. Z.; while to me 
she explained how she had been keeping company with this Mr. Z., 
how far matters had proceeded, and how it was because of his 
desistance that she was now travelling to the West.  Then, when I 
was thus put in possession of the facts, she asked my judgment on 
that type of manly beauty.  I admired it to her heart's content.  
She was not, I think, remarkably veracious in talk, but broidered 
as fancy prompted, and built castles in the air out of her past; 
yet she had that sort of candour, to keep me, in spite of all these 
confidences, steadily aware of her aversion.  Her parting words 
were ingeniously honest.  "I am sure," said she, "we all OUGHT to 
be very much obliged to you."  I cannot pretend that she put me at 
my ease; but I had a certain respect for such a genuine dislike.  A 
poor nature would have slipped, in the course of these 
familiarities, into a sort of worthless toleration for me.

We reached Chicago in the evening.  I was turned out of the cars, 
bundled into an omnibus, and driven off through the streets to the 
station of a different railroad.  Chicago seemed a great and gloomy 
city.  I remember having subscribed, let us say sixpence, towards 
its restoration at the period of the fire; and now when I beheld 
street after street of ponderous houses and crowds of comfortable 
burghers, I thought it would be a graceful act for the corporation 
to refund that sixpence, or, at the least, to entertain me to a 
cheerful dinner.  But there was no word of restitution.  I was that 
city's benefactor, yet I was received in a third-class waiting-
room, and the best dinner I could get was a dish of ham and eggs at 
my own expense.

I can safely say, I have never been so dog-tired as that night in 
Chicago.  When it was time to start, I descended the platform like 
a man in a dream.  It was a long train, lighted from end to end; 
and car after car, as I came up with it, was not only filled but 
overflowing.  My valise, my knapsack, my rug, with those six 
ponderous tomes of Bancroft, weighed me double; I was hot, 
feverish, painfully athirst; and there was a great darkness over 
me, an internal darkness, not to be dispelled by gas.  When at last 
I found an empty bench, I sank into it like a bundle of rags, the 
world seemed to swim away into the distance, and my consciousness 
dwindled within me to a mere pin's head, like a taper on a foggy 
night.

When I came a little more to myself, I found that there had sat 
down beside me a very cheerful, rosy little German gentleman, 
somewhat gone in drink, who was talking away to me, nineteen to the 
dozen, as they say.  I did my best to keep up the conversation; for 
it seemed to me dimly as if something depended upon that.  I heard 
him relate, among many other things, that there were pickpockets on 
the train, who had already robbed a man of forty dollars and a 
return ticket; but though I caught the words, I do not think I 
properly understood the sense until next morning; and I believe I 
replied at the time that I was very glad to hear it.  What else he 
talked about I have no guess; I remember a gabbling sound of words, 
his profuse gesticulation, and his smile, which was highly 
explanatory:  but no more.  And I suppose I must have shown my 
confusion very plainly; for, first, I saw him knit his brows at me 
like one who has conceived a doubt; next, he tried me in German, 
supposing perhaps that I was unfamiliar with the English tongue; 
and finally, in despair, he rose and left me.  I felt chagrined; 
but my fatigue was too crushing for delay, and, stretching myself 
as far as that was possible upon the bench, I was received at once 
into a dreamless stupor.

The little German gentleman was only going a little way into the 
suburbs after a DINER FIN, and was bent on entertainment while the 
journey lasted.  Having failed with me, he pitched next upon 
another emigrant, who had come through from Canada, and was not one 
jot less weary than myself.  Nay, even in a natural state, as I 
found next morning when we scraped acquaintance, he was a heavy, 
uncommunicative man.  After trying him on different topics, it 
appears that the little German gentleman flounced into a temper, 
swore an oath or two, and departed from that car in quest of 
livelier society.  Poor little gentleman!  I suppose he thought an 
emigrant should be a rollicking, free-hearted blade, with a flask 
of foreign brandy and a long, comical story to beguile the moments 
of digestion.

THURSDAY. - I suppose there must be a cycle in the fatigue of 
travelling, for when I awoke next morning, I was entirely renewed 
in spirits and ate a hearty breakfast of porridge, with sweet milk, 
and coffee and hot cakes, at Burlington upon the Mississippi.  
Another long day's ride followed, with but one feature worthy of 
remark.  At a place called Creston, a drunken man got in.  He was 
aggressively friendly, but, according to English notions, not at 
all unpresentable upon a train.  For one stage he eluded the notice 
of the officials; but just as we were beginning to move out of the 
next station, Cromwell by name, by came the conductor.  There was a 
word or two of talk; and then the official had the man by the 
shoulders, twitched him from his seat, marched him through the car, 
and sent him flying on to the track.  It was done in three motions, 
as exact as a piece of drill.  The train was still moving slowly, 
although beginning to mend her pace, and the drunkard got his feet 
without a fall.  He carried a red bundle, though not so red as his 
cheeks; and he shook this menacingly in the air with one hand, 
while the other stole behind him to the region of the kidneys.  It 
was the first indication that I had come among revolvers, and I 
observed it with some emotion.  The conductor stood on the steps 
with one hand on his hip, looking back at him; and perhaps this 
attitude imposed upon the creature, for he turned without further 
ado, and went off staggering along the track towards Cromwell 
followed by a peal of laughter from the cars.  They were speaking 
English all about me, but I knew I was in a foreign land.

Twenty minutes before nine that night, we were deposited at the 
Pacific Transfer Station near Council Bluffs, on the eastern bank 
of the Missouri river.  Here we were to stay the night at a kind of 
caravanserai, set apart for emigrants.  But I gave way to a thirst 
for luxury, separated myself from my companions, and marched with 
my effects into the Union Pacific Hotel.  A white clerk and a 
coloured gentleman whom, in my plain European way, I should call 
the boots, were installed behind a counter like bank tellers.  They 
took my name, assigned me a number, and proceeded to deal with my 
packages.  And here came the tug of war.  I wished to give up my 
packages into safe keeping; but I did not wish to go to bed.  And 
this, it appeared, was impossible in an American hotel.

It was, of course, some inane misunderstanding, and sprang from my 
unfamiliarity with the language.  For although two nations use the 
same words and read the same books, intercourse is not conducted by 
the dictionary.  The business of life is not carried on by words, 
but in set phrases, each with a special and almost a slang 
signification.  Some international obscurity prevailed between me 
and the coloured gentleman at Council Bluffs; so that what I was 
asking, which seemed very natural to me, appeared to him a 
monstrous exigency.  He refused, and that with the plainness of the 
West.  This American manner of conducting matters of business is, 
at first, highly unpalatable to the European.  When we approach a 
man in the way of his calling, and for those services by which he 
earns his bread, we consider him for the time being our hired 
servant.  But in the American opinion, two gentlemen meet and have 
a friendly talk with a view to exchanging favours if they shall 
agree to please.  I know not which is the more convenient, nor even 
which is the more truly courteous.  The English stiffness 
unfortunately tends to be continued after the particular 
transaction is at an end, and thus favours class separations.  But 
on the other hand, these equalitarian plainnesses leave an open 
field for the insolence of Jack-in-office.

I was nettled by the coloured gentleman's refusal, and unbuttoned 
my wrath under the similitude of ironical submission.  I knew 
nothing, I said, of the ways of American hotels; but I had no 
desire to give trouble.  If there was nothing for it but to get to 
bed immediately, let him say the word, and though it was not my 
habit, I should cheerfully obey.

He burst into a shout of laughter.  "Ah!" said he, "you do not know 
about America.  They are fine people in America.  Oh! you will like 
them very well.  But you mustn't get mad.  I know what you want.  
You come along with me."

And issuing from behind the counter, and taking me by the arm like 
an old acquaintance, he led me to the bar of the hotel.

"There," said he, pushing me from him by the shoulder, "go and have 
a drink!"


THE EMIGRANT TRAIN


All this while I had been travelling by mixed trains, where I might 
meet with Dutch widows and little German gentry fresh from table.  
I had been but a latent emigrant; now I was to be branded once 
more, and put apart with my fellows.  It was about two in the 
afternoon of Friday that I found myself in front of the Emigrant 
House, with more than a hundred others, to be sorted and boxed for 
the journey.  A white-haired official, with a stick under one arm, 
and a list in the other hand, stood apart in front of us, and 
called name after name in the tone of a command.  At each name you 
would see a family gather up its brats and bundles and run for the 
hindmost of the three cars that stood awaiting us, and I soon 
concluded that this was to be set apart for the women and children.  
The second or central car, it turned out, was devoted to men 
travelling alone, and the third to the Chinese.  The official was 
easily moved to anger at the least delay; but the emigrants were 
both quick at answering their names, and speedy in getting 
themselves and their effects on board.

The families once housed, we men carried the second car without 
ceremony by simultaneous assault.  I suppose the reader has some 
notion of an American railroad-car, that long, narrow wooden box, 
like a flat-roofed Noah's ark, with a stove and a convenience, one 
at either end, a passage down the middle, and transverse benches 
upon either hand.  Those destined for emigrants on the Union 
Pacific are only remarkable for their extreme plainness, nothing 
but wood entering in any part into their constitution, and for the 
usual inefficacy of the lamps, which often went out and shed but a 
dying glimmer even while they burned.  The benches are too short 
for anything but a young child.  Where there is scarce elbow-room 
for two to sit, there will not be space enough for one to lie.  
Hence the company, or rather, as it appears from certain bills 
about the Transfer Station, the company's servants, have conceived 
a plan for the better accommodation of travellers.  They prevail on 
every two to chum together.  To each of the chums they sell a board 
and three square cushions stuffed with straw, and covered with thin 
cotton.  The benches can be made to face each other in pairs, for 
the backs are reversible.  On the approach of night the boards are 
laid from bench to bench, making a couch wide enough for two, and 
long enough for a man of the middle height; and the chums lie down 
side by side upon the cushions with the head to the conductor's van 
and the feet to the engine.  When the train is full, of course this 
plan is impossible, for there must not be more than one to every 
bench, neither can it be carried out unless the chums agree.  It 
was to bring about this last condition that our white-haired 
official now bestirred himself.  He made a most active master of 
ceremonies, introducing likely couples, and even guaranteeing the 
amiability and honesty of each.  The greater the number of happy 
couples the better for his pocket, for it was he who sold the raw 
material of the beds.  His price for one board and three straw 
cushions began with two dollars and a half; but before the train 
left, and, I am sorry to say, long after I had purchased mine, it 
had fallen to one dollar and a half.

The match-maker had a difficulty with me; perhaps, like some 
ladies, I showed myself too eager for union at any price; but 
certainly the first who was picked out to be my bedfellow, declined 
the honour without thanks.  He was an old, heavy, slow-spoken man, 
I think from Yankeeland, looked me all over with great timidity, 
and then began to excuse himself in broken phrases.  He didn't know 
the young man, he said.  The young man might be very honest, but 
how was he to know that?  There was another young man whom he had 
met already in the train; he guessed he was honest, and would 
prefer to chum with him upon the whole.  All this without any sort 
of excuse, as though I had been inanimate or absent.  I began to 
tremble lest every one should refuse my company, and I be left 
rejected.  But the next in turn was a tall, strapping, long-limbed, 
small-headed, curly-haired Pennsylvania Dutchman, with a soldierly 
smartness in his manner.  To be exact, he had acquired it in the 
navy.  But that was all one; he had at least been trained to 
desperate resolves, so he accepted the match, and the white-haired 
swindler pronounced the connubial benediction, and pocketed his 
fees.

The rest of the afternoon was spent in making up the train.  I am 
afraid to say how many baggage-waggons followed the engine, 
certainly a score; then came the Chinese, then we, then the 
families, and the rear was brought up by the conductor in what, if 
I have it rightly, is called his caboose.  The class to which I 
belonged was of course far the largest, and we ran over, so to 
speak, to both sides; so that there were some Caucasians among the 
Chinamen, and some bachelors among the families.  But our own car 
was pure from admixture, save for one little boy of eight or nine 
who had the whooping-cough.  At last, about six, the long train 
crawled out of the Transfer Station and across the wide Missouri 
river to Omaha, westward bound.

It was a troubled uncomfortable evening in the cars.  There was 
thunder in the air, which helped to keep us restless.  A man played 
many airs upon the cornet, and none of them were much attended to, 
until he came to "Home, sweet home."  It was truly strange to note 
how the talk ceased at that, and the faces began to lengthen.  I 
have no idea whether musically this air is to be considered good or 
bad; but it belongs to that class of art which may be best 
described as a brutal assault upon the feelings.  Pathos must be 
relieved by dignity of treatment.  If you wallow naked in the 
pathetic, like the author of "Home, sweet home," you make your 
hearers weep in an unmanly fashion; and even while yet they are 
moved, they despise themselves and hate the occasion of their 
weakness.  It did not come to tears that night, for the experiment 
was interrupted.  An elderly, hard-looking man, with a goatee beard 
and about as much appearance of sentiment an you would expect from 
a retired slaver, turned with a start and bade the performer stop 
that "damned thing."  "I've heard about enough of that," he added; 
"give us something about the good country we're going to."  A 
murmur of adhesion ran round the car; the performer took the 
instrument from his lips, laughed and nodded, and then struck into 
a dancing measure; and, like a new Timotheus, stilled immediately 
the emotion he had raised.

The day faded; the lamps were lit; a party of wild young men, who 
got off next evening at North Platte, stood together on the stern 
platform, singing "The Sweet By-and-bye" with very tuneful voices; 
the chums began to put up their beds; and it seemed as if the 
business of the day were at an end.  But it was not so; for, the 
train stopping at some station, the cars were instantly thronged 
with the natives, wives and fathers, young men and maidens, some of 
them in little more than nightgear, some with stable lanterns, and 
all offering beds for sale.  Their charge began with twenty-five 
cents a cushion, but fell, before the train went on again, to 
fifteen, with the bed-board gratis, or less than one-fifth of what 
I had paid for mine at the Transfer.  This is my contribution to 
the economy of future emigrants.

A great personage on an American train is the newsboy.  He sells 
books (such books!), papers, fruit, lollipops, and cigars; and on 
emigrant journeys, soap, towels, tin washing dishes, tin coffee 
pitchers, coffee, tea, sugar, and tinned eatables, mostly hash or 
beans and bacon.  Early next morning the newsboy went around the 
cars, and chumming on a more extended principle became the order of 
the hour.  It requires but a copartnery of two to manage beds; but 
washing and eating can be carried on most economically by a 
syndicate of three.  I myself entered a little after sunrise into 
articles of agreement, and became one of the firm of Pennsylvania, 
Shakespeare, and Dubuque.  Shakespeare was my own nickname on the 
cars; Pennsylvania that of my bedfellow; and Dubuque, the name of a 
place in the State of Iowa, that of an amiable young fellow going 
west to cure an asthma, and retarding his recovery by incessantly 
chewing or smoking, and sometimes chewing and smoking together.  I 
have never seen tobacco so sillily abused.  Shakespeare bought a 
tin washing-dish, Dubuque a towel, and Pennsylvania a brick of 
soap.  The partners used these instruments, one after another, 
according to the order of their first awaking; and when the firm 
had finished there was no want of borrowers.  Each filled the tin 
dish at the water filter opposite the stove, and retired with the 
whole stock in trade to the platform of the car.  There he knelt 
down, supporting himself by a shoulder against the woodwork or one 
elbow crooked about the railing, and made a shift to wash his face 
and neck and hands; a cold, an insufficient, and, if the train is 
moving rapidly, a somewhat dangerous toilet.

On a similar division of expense, the firm of Pennsylvania, 
Shakespeare, and Dubuque supplied themselves with coffee, sugar, 
and necessary vessels; and their operations are a type of what went 
on through all the cars.  Before the sun was up the stove would be 
brightly burning; at the first station the natives would come on 
board with milk and eggs and coffee cakes; and soon from end to end 
the car would be filled with little parties breakfasting upon the 
bed-boards.  It was the pleasantest hour of the day.

There were meals to be had, however, by the wayside:  a breakfast 
in the morning, a dinner somewhere between eleven and two, and 
supper from five to eight or nine at night.  We had rarely less 
than twenty minutes for each; and if we had not spent many another 
twenty minutes waiting for some express upon a side track among 
miles of desert, we might have taken an hour to each repast and 
arrived at San Francisco up to time.  For haste is not the foible 
of an emigrant train.  It gets through on sufferance, running the 
gauntlet among its more considerable brethren; should there be a 
block, it is unhesitatingly sacrificed; and they cannot, in 
consequence, predict the length of the passage within a day or so.  
Civility is the main comfort that you miss.  Equality, though 
conceived very largely in America, does not extend so low down as 
to an emigrant.  Thus in all other trains, a warning cry of  "All 
aboard!" recalls the passengers to take their seats; but as soon as 
I was alone with emigrants, and from the Transfer all the way to 
San Francisco, I found this ceremony was pretermitted; the train 
stole from the station without note of warning, and you had to keep 
an eye upon it even while you ate.  The annoyance is considerable, 
and the disrespect both wanton and petty.

Many conductors, again, will hold no communication with an 
emigrant.  I asked a conductor one day at what time the train would 
stop for dinner; as he made no answer I repeated the question, with 
a like result; a third time I returned to the charge, and then 
Jack-in-office looked me coolly in the face for several seconds and 
turned ostentatiously away.  I believe he was half ashamed of his 
brutality; for when another person made the same inquiry, although 
he still refused the information, he condescended to answer, and 
even to justify his reticence in a voice loud enough for me to 
hear.  It was, he said, his principle not to tell people where they 
were to dine; for one answer led to many other questions, as what 
o'clock it was? or, how soon should we be there? and he could not 
afford to be eternally worried.

As you are thus cut off from the superior authorities, a great deal 
of your comfort depends on the character of the newsboy.  He has it 
in his power indefinitely to better and brighten the emigrant's 
lot.  The newsboy with whom we started from the Transfer was a 
dark, bullying, contemptuous, insolent scoundrel, who treated us 
like dogs.  Indeed, in his case, matters came nearly to a fight.  
It happened thus:  he was going his rounds through the cars with 
some commodities for sale, and coming to a party who were at SEVEN-
UP or CASCINO (our two games), upon a bed-board, slung down a 
cigar-box in the middle of the cards, knocking one man's hand to 
the floor.  It was the last straw.  In a moment the whole party 
were upon their feet, the cigars were upset, and he was ordered to 
"get out of that directly, or he would get more than he reckoned 
for." The fellow grumbled and muttered, but ended by making off, 
and was less openly insulting in the future.  On the other hand, 
the lad who rode with us in this capacity from Ogden to Sacramento 
made himself the friend of all, and helped us with information, 
attention, assistance, and a kind countenance.  He told us where 
and when we should have our meals, and how long the train would 
stop; kept seats at table for those who were delayed, and watched 
that we should neither be left behind nor yet unnecessarily 
hurried.  You, who live at home at ease, can hardly realise the 
greatness of this service, even had it stood alone.  When I think 
of that lad coming and going, train after train, with his bright 
face and civil words, I see how easily a good man may become the 
benefactor of his kind.  Perhaps he is discontented with himself, 
perhaps troubled with ambitions; why, if he but knew it, he is a 
hero of the old Greek stamp; and while he thinks he is only earning 
a profit of a few cents, and that perhaps exorbitant, he is doing a 
man's work, and bettering the world.

I must tell here an experience of mine with another newsboy.  I 
tell it because it gives so good an example of that uncivil 
kindness of the American, which is perhaps their most bewildering 
character to one newly landed.  It was immediately after I had left 
the emigrant train; and I am told I looked like a man at death's 
door, so much had this long journey shaken me.  I sat at the end of 
a car, and the catch being broken, and myself feverish and sick, I 
had to hold the door open with my foot for the sake of air.  In 
this attitude my leg debarred the newsboy from his box of 
merchandise.  I made haste to let him pass when I observed that he 
was coming; but I was busy with a book, and so once or twice he 
came upon me unawares.  On these occasions he most rudely struck my 
foot aside; and though I myself apologised, as if to show him the 
way, he answered me never a word.  I chafed furiously, and I fear 
the next time it would have come to words.  But suddenly I felt a 
touch upon my shoulder, and a large juicy pear was put into my 
hand.  It was the newsboy, who had observed that I was looking ill, 
and so made me this present out of a tender heart.  For the rest of 
the journey I was petted like a sick child; he lent me newspapers, 
thus depriving himself of his legitimate profit on their sale, and 
came repeatedly to sit by me and cheer me up.


THE PLAINS OF NEBRASKA


It had thundered on the Friday night, but the sun rose on Saturday 
without a cloud.  We were at sea - there is no other adequate 
expression - on the plains of Nebraska.  I made my observatory on 
the top of a fruit-waggon, and sat by the hour upon that perch to 
spy about me, and to spy in vain for something new.  It was a world 
almost without a feature; an empty sky, an empty earth; front and 
back, the line of railway stretched from horizon to horizon, like a 
cue across a billiard-board; on either hand, the green plain ran 
till it touched the skirts of heaven.  Along the track innumerable 
wild sunflowers, no bigger than a crown-piece, bloomed in a 
continuous flower-bed; grazing beasts were seen upon the prairie at 
all degrees of distance and diminution; and now and again we might 
perceive a few dots beside the railroad which grew more and more 
distinct as we drew nearer till they turned into wooden cabins, and 
then dwindled and dwindled in our wake until they melted into their 
surroundings, and we were once more alone upon the billiard-board.  
The train toiled over this infinity like a snail; and being the one 
thing moving, it was wonderful what huge proportions it began to 
assume in our regard.  It seemed miles in length, and either end of 
it within but a step of the horizon.  Even my own body or my own 
head seemed a great thing in that emptiness.  I note the feeling 
the more readily as it is the contrary of what I have read of in 
the experience of others.  Day and night, above the roar of the 
train, our ears were kept busy with the incessant chirp of 
grasshoppers - a noise like the winding up of countless clocks and 
watches, which began after a while to seem proper to that land.

To one hurrying through by steam there was a certain exhilaration 
in this spacious vacancy, this greatness of the air, this discovery 
of the whole arch of heaven, this straight, unbroken, prison-line 
of the horizon.  Yet one could not but reflect upon the weariness 
of those who passed by there in old days, at the foot's pace of 
oxen, painfully urging their teams, and with no landmark but that 
unattainable evening sun for which they steered, and which daily 
fled them by an equal stride.  They had nothing, it would seem, to 
overtake; nothing by which to reckon their advance; no sight for 
repose or for encouragement; but stage after stage, only the dead 
green waste under foot, and the mocking, fugitive horizon.  But the 
eye, as I have been told, found differences even here; and at the 
worst the emigrant came, by perseverance, to the end of his toil.  
It is the settlers, after all, at whom we have a right to marvel.  
Our consciousness, by which we live, is itself but the creature of 
variety.  Upon what food does it subsist in such a land?  What 
livelihood can repay a human creature for a life spent in this huge 
sameness?  He is cut off from books, from news, from company, from 
all that can relieve existence but the prosecution of his affairs.  
A sky full of stars is the most varied spectacle that he can hope.  
He may walk five miles and see nothing; ten, and it is as though he 
had not moved; twenty, and still he is in the midst of the same 
great level, and has approached no nearer to the one object within 
view, the flat horizon which keeps pace with his advance.  We are 
full at home of the question of agreeable wall-papers, and wise 
people are of opinion that the temper may be quieted by sedative 
surroundings.  But what is to be said of the Nebraskan settler?  
His is a wall-paper with a vengeance - one quarter of the universe 
laid bare in all its gauntness.

His eye must embrace at every glance the whole seeming concave of 
the visible world; it quails before so vast an outlook, it is 
tortured by distance; yet there is no rest or shelter till the man 
runs into his cabin, and can repose his sight upon things near at 
hand.  Hence, I am told, a sickness of the vision peculiar to these 
empty plains.

Yet perhaps with sunflowers and cicadae, summer and winter, cattle, 
wife and family, the settler may create a full and various 
existence.  One person at least I saw upon the plains who seemed in 
every way superior to her lot.  This was a woman who boarded us at 
a way station, selling milk.  She was largely formed; her features 
were more than comely; she had that great rarity - a fine 
complexion which became her; and her eyes were kind, dark, and 
steady.  She sold milk with patriarchal grace.  There was not a 
line in her countenance, not a note in her soft and sleepy voice, 
but spoke of an entire contentment with her life.  It would have 
been fatuous arrogance to pity such a woman.  Yet the place where 
she lived was to me almost ghastly.  Less than a dozen wooden 
houses, all of a shape and all nearly of a size, stood planted 
along the railway lines.  Each stood apart in its own lot.  Each 
opened direct off the billiard-board, as if it were a billiard-
board indeed, and these only models that had been set down upon it 
ready made.  Her own, into which I looked, was clean but very 
empty, and showed nothing homelike but the burning fire.  This 
extreme newness, above all in so naked and flat a country, gives a 
strong impression of artificiality.  With none of the litter and 
discoloration of human life; with the paths unworn, and the houses 
still sweating from the axe, such a settlement as this seems purely 
scenic.  The mind is loth to accept it for a piece of reality; and 
it seems incredible that life can go on with so few properties, or 
the great child, man, find entertainment in so bare a playroom.

And truly it is as yet an incomplete society in some points; or at 
least it contained, as I passed through, one person incompletely 
civilised.  At North Platte, where we supped that evening, one man 
asked another to pass the milk-jug.  This other was well-dressed 
and of what we should call a respectable appearance; a darkish man, 
high spoken, eating as though he had some usage of society; but he 
turned upon the first speaker with extraordinary vehemence of tone 
-

"There's a waiter here!" he cried.

"I only asked you to pass the milk," explained the first.

Here is the retort verbatim -

"Pass!  Hell!  I'm not paid for that business; the waiter's paid 
for it.  You should use civility at table, and, by God, I'll show 
you how!"

The other man very wisely made no answer, and the bully went on 
with his supper as though nothing had occurred.  It pleases me to 
think that some day soon he will meet with one of his own kidney; 
and that perhaps both may fall.


THE DESERT OF WYOMING


To cross such a plain is to grow homesick for the mountains.  I 
longed for the Black Hills of Wyoming, which I knew we were soon to 
enter, like an ice-bound whaler for the spring.  Alas! and it was a 
worse country than the other.  All Sunday and Monday we travelled 
through these sad mountains, or over the main ridge of the Rockies, 
which is a fair match to them for misery of aspect.  Hour after 
hour it was the same unhomely and unkindly world about our onward 
path; tumbled boulders, cliffs that drearily imitate the shape of 
monuments and fortifications - how drearily, how tamely, none can 
tell who has not seen them; not a tree, not a patch of sward, not 
one shapely or commanding mountain form; sage-brush, eternal sage-
brush; over all, the same weariful and gloomy colouring, grays 
warming into brown, grays darkening towards black; and for sole 
sign of life, here and there a few fleeing antelopes; here and 
there, but at incredible intervals, a creek running in a canon.  
The plains have a grandeur of their own; but here there is nothing 
but a contorted smallness.  Except for the air, which was light and 
stimulating, there was not one good circumstance in that God-
forsaken land.

I had been suffering in my health a good deal all the way; and at 
last, whether I was exhausted by my complaint or poisoned in some 
wayside eating-house, the evening we left Laramie, I fell sick 
outright.  That was a night which I shall not readily forget.  The 
lamps did not go out; each made a faint shining in its own 
neighbourhood, and the shadows were confounded together in the 
long, hollow box of the car.  The sleepers lay in uneasy attitudes; 
here two chums alongside, flat upon their backs like dead folk; 
there a man sprawling on the floor, with his face upon his arm; 
there another half seated with his head and shoulders on the bench.  
The most passive were continually and roughly shaken by the 
movement of the train; others stirred, turned, or stretched out 
their arms like children; it was surprising how many groaned and 
murmured in their sleep; and as I passed to and fro, stepping 
across the prostrate, and caught now a snore, now a gasp, now a 
half-formed word, it gave me a measure of the worthlessness of rest 
in that unresting vehicle.  Although it was chill, I was obliged to 
open my window, for the degradation of the air soon became 
intolerable to one who was awake and using the full supply of life.  
Outside, in a glimmering night, I saw the black, amorphous hills 
shoot by unweariedly into our wake.  They that long for morning 
have never longed for it more earnestly than I.

And yet when day came, it was to shine upon the same broken and 
unsightly quarter of the world.  Mile upon mile, and not a tree, a 
bird, or a river.  Only down the long, sterile canons, the train 
shot hooting and awoke the resting echo.  That train was the one 
piece of life in all the deadly land; it was the one actor, the one 
spectacle fit to be observed in this paralysis of man and nature.  
And when I think how the railroad has been pushed through this 
unwatered wilderness and haunt of savage tribes, and now will bear 
an emigrant for some 12 pounds from the Atlantic to the Golden 
Gates; how at each stage of the construction, roaring, impromptu 
cities, full of gold and lust and death, sprang up and then died 
away again, and are now but wayside stations in the desert; how in 
these uncouth places pig-tailed Chinese pirates worked side by side 
with border ruffians and broken men from Europe, talking together 
in a mixed dialect, mostly oaths, gambling, drinking, quarrelling 
and murdering like wolves; how the plumed hereditary lord of all 
America heard, in this last fastness, the scream of the "bad 
medicine waggon" charioting his foes; and then when I go on to 
remember that all this epical turmoil was conducted by gentlemen in 
frock coats, and with a view to nothing more extraordinary than a 
fortune and a subsequent visit to Paris, it seems to me, I own, as 
if this railway were the one typical achievement of the age in 
which we live, as if it brought together into one plot all the ends 
of the world and all the degrees of social rank, and offered to 
some great writer the busiest, the most extended, and the most 
varied subject for an enduring literary work.  If it be romance, if 
it be contrast, if it be heroism that we require, what was Troy 
town to this?  But, alas! it is not these things that are necessary 
- it is only Homer.

Here also we are grateful to the train, as to some god who conducts 
us swiftly through these shades and by so many hidden perils.  
Thirst, hunger, the sleight and ferocity of Indians are all no more 
feared, so lightly do we skim these horrible lands; as the gull, 
who wings safely through the hurricane and past the shark.  Yet we 
should not be forgetful of these hardships of the past; and to keep 
the balance true, since I have complained of the trifling 
discomforts of my journey, perhaps more than was enough, let me add 
an original document.  It was not written by Homer, but by a boy of 
eleven, long since dead, and is dated only twenty years ago.  I 
shall punctuate, to make things clearer, but not change the 
spelling.

"My dear Sister Mary, - I am afraid you will go nearly crazy when 
you read my letter.  If Jerry" (the writer's eldest brother) "has 
not written to you before now, you will be surprised to heare that 
we are in California, and that poor Thomas" (another brother, of 
fifteen) "is dead.  We started from - in July, with plenly of 
provisions and too yoke oxen.  We went along very well till we got 
within six or seven hundred miles of California, when the Indians 
attacked us.  We found places where they had killed the emigrants.  
We had one passenger with us, too guns, and one revolver; so we ran 
all the lead We had into bullets (and) hung the guns up in the 
wagon so that we could get at them in a minit.  It was about two 
o'clock in the afternoon; droave the cattel a little way; when a 
prairie chicken alited a little way from the wagon.

"Jerry took out one of the guns to shoot it, and told Tom drive the 
oxen.  Tom and I drove the oxen, and Jerry and the passenger went 
on.  Then, after a little, I left Tom and caught up with Jerry and 
the other man.  Jerry stopped Tom to come up; me and the man went 
on and sit down by a little stream.  In a few minutes, we heard 
some noise; then three shots (they all struck poor Tom, I suppose); 
then they gave the war hoop, and as many as twenty of the redskins 
came down upon us.  The three that shot Tom was hid by the side of 
the road in the bushes.

"I thought the Tom and Jerry were shot; so I told the other man 
that Tom and Jerry were dead, and that we had better try to escape, 
if possible.  I had no shoes on; having a sore foot, I thought I 
would not put them on.  The man and me run down the road, but We 
was soon stopped by an Indian on a pony.  We then turend the other 
way, and run up the side of the Mountain, and hid behind some cedar 
trees, and stayed there till dark.  The Indians hunted all over 
after us, and verry close to us, so close that we could here there 
tomyhawks Jingle.  At dark the man and me started on, I stubing my 
toes against sticks and stones.  We traveld on all night; and next 
morning, just as it was getting gray, we saw something in the shape 
of a man.  It layed Down in the grass.  We went up to it, and it 
was Jerry.  He thought we ware Indians.  You can imagine how glad 
he was to see me.  He thought we was all dead but him, and we 
thought him and Tom was dead.  He had the gun that he took out of 
the wagon to shoot the prairie Chicken; all he had was the load 
that was in it.

"We traveld on till about eight o'clock, We caught up with one 
wagon with too men with it.  We had traveld with them before one 
day; we stopt and they Drove on; we knew that they was ahead of us, 
unless they had been killed to.  My feet was so sore when we caught 
up with them that I had to ride; I could not step.  We traveld on 
for too days, when the men that owned the cattle said they would 
(could) not drive them another inch.  We unyoked the oxen; we had 
about seventy pounds of flour; we took it out and divided it into 
four packs.  Each of the men took about 18 pounds apiece and a 
blanket.  I carried a little bacon, dried meat, and little quilt; I 
had in all about twelve pounds.  We had one pint of flour a day for 
our alloyance.  Sometimes we made soup of it; sometimes we (made) 
pancakes; and sometimes mixed it up with cold water and eat it that 
way.  We traveld twelve or fourteen days.  The time came at last 
when we should have to reach some place or starve.  We saw fresh 
horse and cattle tracks.  The morning come, we scraped all the 
flour out of the sack, mixed it up, and baked it into bread, and 
made some soup, and eat everything we had.  We traveld on all day 
without anything to eat, and that evening we Caught up with a sheep 
train of eight wagons.  We traveld with them till we arrived at the 
settlements; and know I am safe in California, and got to good 
home, and going to school.

"Jerry is working in - .  It is a good country.  You can get from 
50 to 60 and 75 Dollars for cooking.  Tell me all about the affairs 
in the States, and how all the folks get along."

And so ends this artless narrative.  The little man was at school 
again, God bless him, while his brother lay scalped upon the 
deserts.


FELLOW-PASSENGERS


At Ogden we changed cars from the Union Pacific to the Central 
Pacific line of railroad.  The change was doubly welcome; for, 
first, we had better cars on the new line; and, second, those in 
which we had been cooped for more than ninety hours had begun to 
stink abominably.  Several yards away, as we returned, let us say 
from dinner, our nostrils were assailed by rancid air.  I have 
stood on a platform while the whole train was shunting; and as the 
dwelling-cars drew near, there would come a whiff of pure 
menagerie, only a little sourer, as from men instead of monkeys.  I 
think we are human only in virtue of open windows.  Without fresh 
air, you only require a bad heart, and a remarkable command of the 
Queen's English, to become such another as Dean Swift; a kind of 
leering, human goat, leaping and wagging your scut on mountains of 
offence.  I do my best to keep my head the other way, and look for 
the human rather than the bestial in this Yahoo-like business of 
the emigrant train.  But one thing I must say, the car of the 
Chinese was notably the least offensive.

The cars on the Central Pacific were nearly twice as high, and so 
proportionally airier; they were freshly varnished, which gave us 
all a sense of cleanliness an though we had bathed; the seats drew 
out and joined in the centre, so that there was no more need for 
bed boards; and there was an upper tier of berths which could be 
closed by day and opened at night.

I had by this time some opportunity of seeing the people whom I was 
among.  They were in rather marked contrast to the emigrants I had 
met on board ship while crossing the Atlantic.  They were mostly 
lumpish fellows, silent and noisy, a common combination; somewhat 
sad, I should say, with an extraordinary poor taste in humour, and 
little interest in their fellow-creatures beyond that of a cheap 
and merely external curiosity.  If they heard a man's name and 
business, they seemed to think they had the heart of that mystery; 
but they were as eager to know that much as they were indifferent 
to the rest.  Some of them were on nettles till they learned your 
name was Dickson and you a journeyman baker; but beyond that, 
whether you were Catholic or Mormon, dull or clever, fierce or 
friendly, was all one to them.  Others who were not so stupid, 
gossiped a little, and, I am bound to say, unkindly.  A favourite 
witticism was for some lout to raise the alarm of  "All aboard!" 
while the rest of us were dining, thus contributing his mite to the 
general discomfort.  Such a one was always much applauded for his 
high spirits.  When I was ill coming through Wyoming, I was 
astonished - fresh from the eager humanity on board ship - to meet 
with little but laughter.  One of the young men even amused himself 
by incommoding me, as was then very easy; and that not from ill-
nature, but mere clodlike incapacity to think, for he expected me 
to join the laugh.  I did so, but it was phantom merriment.  Later 
on, a man from Kansas had three violent epileptic fits, and though, 
of course, there were not wanting some to help him, it was rather 
superstitious terror than sympathy that his case evoked among his 
fellow-passengers.  "Oh, I hope he's not going to die!" cried a 
woman; "it would be terrible to have a dead body!"  And there was a 
very general movement to leave the man behind at the next station.  
This, by good fortune, the conductor negatived.

There was a good deal of story-telling in some quarters; in others, 
little but silence.  In this society, more than any other that ever 
I was in, it was the narrator alone who seemed to enjoy the 
narrative.  It was rarely that any one listened for the listening.  
If he lent an ear to another man's story, it was because he was in 
immediate want of a hearer for one of his own.  Food and the 
progress of the train were the subjects most generally treated; 
many joined to discuss these who otherwise would hold their 
tongues.  One small knot had no better occupation than to worm out 
of me my name; and the more they tried, the more obstinately fixed 
I grew to baffle them.  They assailed me with artful questions and 
insidious offers of correspondence in the future; but I was 
perpetually on my guard, and parried their assaults with inward 
laughter.  I am sure Dubuque would have given me ten dollars for 
the secret.  He owed me far more, had he understood life, for thus 
preserving him a lively interest throughout the journey.  I met one 
of my fellow-passengers months after, driving a street tramway car 
in San Francisco; and, as the joke was now out of season, told him 
my name without subterfuge.  You never saw a man more chapfallen.  
But had my name been Demogorgon, after so prolonged a mystery he 
had still been disappointed.

There were no emigrants direct from Europe - save one German family 
and a knot of Cornish miners who kept grimly by themselves, one 
reading the New Testament all day long through steel spectacles, 
the rest discussing privately the secrets of their old-world, 
mysterious race.  Lady Hester Stanhope believed she could make 
something great of the Cornish; for my part, I can make nothing of 
them at all.  A division of races, older and more original than 
that of Babel, keeps this close, esoteric family apart from 
neighbouring Englishmen.  Not even a Red Indian seems more foreign 
in my eyes.  This is one of the lessons of travel - that some of 
the strangest races dwell next door to you at home.

The rest were all American born, but they came from almost every 
quarter of that Continent.  All the States of the North had sent 
out a fugitive to cross the plains with me.  From Virginia, from 
Pennsylvania, from New York, from far western Iowa and Kansas, from 
Maime that borders on the Canadas, and from the Canadas themselves 
- some one or two were fleeing in quest of a better land and better 
wages.  The talk in the train, like the talk I heard on the 
steamer, ran upon hard times, short commons, and hope that moves 
ever westward.  I thought of my shipful from Great Britain with a 
feeling of despair.  They had come 3000 miles, and yet not far 
enough.  Hard times bowed them out of the Clyde, and stood to 
welcome them at Sandy Hook.  Where were they to go?  Pennsylvania, 
Maine, Iowa, Kansas?  These were not places for immigration, but 
for emigration, it appeared; not one of them, but I knew a man who 
had lifted up his heel and left it for an ungrateful country.  And 
it was still westward that they ran.  Hunger, you would have 
thought, came out of the east like the sun, and the evening was 
made of edible gold.  And, meantime, in the car in front of me, 
were there not half a hundred emigrants from the opposite quarter?  
Hungry Europe and hungry China, each pouring from their gates in 
search of provender, had here come face to face.  The two waves had 
met; east and west had alike failed; the whole round world had been 
prospected and condemned; there was no El Dorado anywhere; and till 
one could emigrate to the moon, it seemed as well to stay patiently 
at home.  Nor was there wanting another sign, at once more 
picturesque and more disheartening; for, as we continued to steam 
westward toward the land of gold, we were continually passing other 
emigrant trains upon the journey east; and these were as crowded as 
our own.  Had all these return voyagers made a fortune in the 
mines?  Were they all bound for Paris, and to be in Rome by Easter?  
It would seem not, for, whenever we met them, the passengers ran on 
the platform and cried to us through the windows, in a kind of 
wailing chorus, to "come back."  On the plains of Nebraska, in the 
mountains of Wyoming, it was still the same cry, and dismal to my 
heart, "Come back!"  That was what we heard by the way "about the 
good country we were going to."  And at that very hour the Sand-lot 
of San Francisco was crowded with the unemployed, and the echo from 
the other side of Market Street was repeating the rant of 
demagogues.

If, in truth, it were only for the sake of wages that men emigrate, 
how many thousands would regret the bargain!  But wages, indeed, 
are only one consideration out of many; for we are a race of 
gipsies, and love change and travel for themselves.


DESPISED RACES


Of all stupid ill-feelings, the sentiment of my fellow Caucasians 
towards our companions in the Chinese car was the most stupid and 
the worst.  They seemed never to have looked at them, listened to 
them, or thought of them, but hated them A PRIORI.  The Mongols 
were their enemies in that cruel and treacherous battle-field of 
money.  They could work better and cheaper in half a hundred 
industries, and hence there was no calumny too idle for the 
Caucasians to repeat, and even to believe.  They declared them 
hideous vermin, and affected a kind of choking in the throat when 
they beheld them.  Now, as a matter of fact, the young Chinese man 
is so like a large class of European women, that on raising my head 
and suddenly catching sight of one at a considerable distance, I 
have for an instant been deceived by the resemblance.  I do not say 
it is the most attractive class of our women, but for all that many 
a man's wife is less pleasantly favoured.  Again, my emigrants 
declared that the Chinese were dirty.  I cannot say they were 
clean, for that was impossible upon the journey; but in their 
efforts after cleanliness they put the rest of us to shame.  We all 
pigged and stewed in one infamy, wet our hands and faces for half a 
minute daily on the platform, and were unashamed.  But the Chinese 
never lost an opportunity, and you would see them washing their 
feet - an act not dreamed of among ourselves - and going as far as 
decency permitted to wash their whole bodies.  I may remark by the 
way that the dirtier people are in their persons the more delicate 
is their sense of modesty.  A clean man strips in a crowded 
boathouse; but he who is unwashed slinks in and out of bed without 
uncovering an inch of skin.  Lastly, these very foul and malodorous 
Caucasians entertained the surprising illusion that it was the 
Chinese waggon, and that alone, which stank.  I have said already 
that it was the exceptions and notably the freshest of the three.

These judgments are typical of the feeling in all Western America.  
The Chinese are considered stupid, because they are imperfectly 
acquainted with English.  They are held to be base, because their 
dexterity and frugality enable them to underbid the lazy, luxurious 
Caucasian.  They are said to be thieves; I am sure they have no 
monopoly of that.  They are called cruel; the Anglo-Saxon and the 
cheerful Irishman may each reflect before he bears the accusation.  
I am told, again, that they are of the race of river pirates, and 
belong to the most despised and dangerous class in the Celestial 
Empire.  But if this be so, what remarkable pirates have we here! 
and what must be the virtues, the industry, the education, and the 
intelligence of their superiors at home!

Awhile ago it was the Irish, now it is the Chinese that must go.  
Such is the cry.  It seems, after all, that no country is bound to 
submit to immigration any more than to invasion; each is war to the 
knife, and resistance to either but legitimate defence.  Yet we may 
regret the free tradition of the republic, which loved to depict 
herself with open arms, welcoming all unfortunates.  And certainly, 
as a man who believes that he loves freedom, I may be excused some 
bitterness when I find her sacred name misused in the contention.  
It was but the other day that I heard a vulgar fellow in the Sand-
lot, the popular tribune of San Francisco, roaring for arms and 
butchery.  "At the call of Abraham Lincoln," said the orator, "ye 
rose in the name of freedom to set free the negroes; can ye not 
rise and liberate yourselves from a few dirty Mongolians?"

For my own part, I could not look but with wonder and respect on 
the Chinese.  Their forefathers watched the stars before mine had 
begun to keep pigs.  Gun-powder and printing, which the other day 
we imitated, and a school of manners which we never had the 
delicacy so much as to desire to imitate, were theirs in a long-
past antiquity.  They walk the earth with us, but it seems they 
must be of different clay.  They hear the clock strike the same 
hour, yet surely of a different epoch.  They travel by steam 
conveyance, yet with such a baggage of old Asiatic thoughts and 
superstitions as might check the locomotive in its course.  
Whatever is thought within the circuit of the Great Wall; what the 
wry-eyed, spectacled schoolmaster teaches in the hamlets round 
Pekin; religions so old that our language looks a halfing boy 
alongside; philosophy so wise that our best philosophers find 
things therein to wonder at; all this travelled alongside of me for 
thousands of miles over plain and mountain.  Heaven knows if we had 
one common thought or fancy all that way, or whether our eyes, 
which yet were formed upon the same design, beheld the same world 
out of the railway windows.  And when either of us turned his 
thoughts to home and childhood, what a strange dissimilarity must 
there not have been in these pictures of the mind - when I beheld 
that old, gray, castled city, high throned above the firth, with 
the flag of Britain flying, and the red-coat sentry pacing over 
all; and the man in the next car to me would conjure up some junks 
and a pagoda and a fort of porcelain, and call it, with the same 
affection, home.

Another race shared among my fellow-passengers in the disfavour of 
the Chinese; and that, it is hardly necessary to say, was the noble 
red man of old story - over whose own hereditary continent we had 
been steaming all these days.  I saw no wild or independent Indian; 
indeed, I hear that such avoid the neighbourhood of the train; but 
now and again at way stations, a husband and wife and a few 
children, disgracefully dressed out with the sweepings of 
civilisation, came forth and stared upon the emigrants.  The silent 
stoicism of their conduct, and the pathetic degradation of their 
appearance, would have touched any thinking creature, but my 
fellow-passengers danced and jested round them with a truly Cockney 
baseness.  I was ashamed for the thing we call civilisation.  We 
should carry upon our consciences so much, at least, of our 
forefathers' misconduct as we continue to profit by ourselves.

If oppression drives a wise man mad, what should be raging in the 
hearts of these poor tribes, who have been driven back and back, 
step after step, their promised reservations torn from them one 
after another as the States extended westward, until at length they 
are shut up into these hideous mountain deserts of the centre - and 
even there find themselves invaded, insulted, and hunted out by 
ruffianly diggers?  The eviction of the Cherokees (to name but an 
instance), the extortion of Indian agents, the outrages of the 
wicked, the ill-faith of all, nay, down to the ridicule of such 
poor beings as were here with me upon the train, make up a chapter 
of injustice and indignity such as a man must be in some ways base 
if his heart will suffer him to pardon or forget.  These old, well-
founded, historical hatreds have a savour of nobility for the 
independent.  That the Jew should not love the Christian, nor the 
Irishman love the English, nor the Indian brave tolerate the 
thought of the American, is not disgraceful to the nature of man; 
rather, indeed, honourable, since it depends on wrongs ancient like 
the race, and not personal to him who cherishes the indignation.


TO THE GOLDEN GATES


A little corner of Utah is soon traversed, and leaves no particular 
impressions on the mind.  By an early hour on Wednesday morning we 
stopped to breakfast at Toano, a little station on a bleak, high-
lying plateau in Nevada.  The man who kept the station eating-house 
was a Scot, and learning that I was the same, he grew very 
friendly, and gave me some advice on the country I was now 
entering.  "You see," said he, "I tell you this, because I come 
from your country."  Hail, brither Scots!

His most important hint was on the moneys of this part of the 
world.  There is something in the simplicity of a decimal coinage 
which is revolting to the human mind; thus the French, in small 
affairs, reckon strictly by halfpence; and you have to solve, by a 
spasm of mental arithmetic, such posers as thirty-two, forty-five, 
or even a hundred halfpence.  In the Pacific States they have made 
a bolder push for complexity, and settle their affairs by a coin 
that no longer that no longer exists - the BIT, or old Mexican 
real.  The supposed value of the bit is twelve and a half cents, 
eight to the dollar.  When it comes to two bits, the quarter-dollar 
stands for the required amount.  But how about an odd bit?  The 
nearest coin to it is a dime, which is, short by a fifth.  That, 
then, is called a SHORT bit.  If you have one, you lay it 
triumphantly down, and save two and a half cents.  But if you have 
not, and lay down a quarter, the bar-keeper or shopman calmly 
tenders you a dime by way of change; and thus you have paid what is 
called a LONG BIT, and lost two and a half cents, or even, by 
comparison with a short bit, five cents.  In country places all 
over the Pacific coast, nothing lower than a bit is ever asked or 
taken, which vastly increases the cost of life; as even for a glass 
of beer you must pay fivepence or sevenpence-halfpenny, as the case 
may be.  You would say that this system of mutual robbery was as 
broad as it was long; but I have discovered a plan to make it 
broader, with which I here endow the public.  It is brief and 
simple - radiantly simple.  There is one place where five cents are 
recognised, and that is the post-office.  A quarter is only worth 
two bits, a short and a long.  Whenever you have a quarter, go to 
the post-office and buy five cents worth of postage-stamps; you 
will receive in change two dimes, that is, two short bits.  The 
purchasing power of your money is undiminished.  You can go and 
have your two glasses of beer all the same; and you have made 
yourself a present of five cents worth of postage-stamps into the 
bargain.  Benjamin Franklin would have patted me on the head for 
this discovery.

From Toano we travelled all day through deserts of alkali and sand, 
horrible to man, and bare sage-brush country that seemed little 
kindlier, and came by supper-time to Elko.  As we were standing, 
after our manner, outside the station, I saw two men whip suddenly 
from underneath the cars, and take to their heels across country.  
They were tramps, it appeared, who had been riding on the beams 
since eleven of the night before; and several of my fellow-
passengers had already seen and conversed with them while we broke 
our fast at Toano.  These land stowaways play a great part over 
here in America, and I should have liked dearly to become 
acquainted with them.

At Elko an odd circumstance befell me.  I was coming out from 
supper, when I was stopped by a small, stout, ruddy man, followed 
by two others taller and ruddier than himself.

"Excuse me, sir," he said, "but do you happen to be going on?"

I said I was, whereupon he said he hoped to persuade me to desist 
from that intention.  He had a situation to offer me, and if we 
could come to terms, why, good and well.  "You see," he continued, 
"I'm running a theatre here, and we're a little short in the 
orchestra.  You're a musician, I guess?"

I assured him that, beyond a rudimentary acquaintance with "Auld 
Lang Syne" and "The Wearing of the Green," I had no pretension 
whatever to that style.  He seemed much put out of countenance; and 
one of his taller companions asked him, on the nail, for five 
dollars.

"You see, sir," added the latter to me, "he bet you were a 
musician; I bet you weren't.  No offence, I hope?"

"None whatever," I said, and the two withdrew to the bar, where I 
presume the debt was liquidated.

This little adventure woke bright hopes in my fellow-travellers, 
who thought they had now come to a country where situations went a-
begging.  But I am not so sure that the offer was in good faith.  
Indeed, I am more than half persuaded it was but a feeler to decide 
the bet.

Of all the next day I will tell you nothing, for the best of all 
reasons, that I remember no more than that we continued through 
desolate and desert scenes, fiery hot and deadly weary.  But some 
time after I had fallen asleep that night, I was awakened by one of 
my companions.  It was in vain that I resisted.  A fire of 
enthusiasm and whisky burned in his eyes; and he declared we were 
in a new country, and I must come forth upon the platform and see 
with my own eyes.  The train was then, in its patient way, standing 
halted in a by-track.  It was a clear, moonlit night; but the 
valley was too narrow to admit the moonshine direct, and only a 
diffused glimmer whitened the tall rocks and relieved the blackness 
of the pines.  A hoarse clamour filled the air; it was the 
continuous plunge of a cascade somewhere near at hand among the 
mountains.  The air struck chill, but tasted good and vigorous in 
the nostrils - a fine, dry, old mountain atmosphere.  I was dead 
sleepy, but I returned to roost with a grateful mountain feeling at 
my heart.

When I awoke next morning, I was puzzled for a while to know if it 
were day or night, for the illumination was unusual.  I sat up at 
last, and found we were grading slowly downward through a long 
snowshed; and suddenly we shot into an open; and before we were 
swallowed into the next length of wooden tunnel, I had one glimpse 
of a huge pine-forested ravine upon my left, a foaming river, and a 
sky already coloured with the fires of dawn.  I am usually very 
calm over the displays of nature; but you will scarce believe how 
my heart leaped at this.  It was like meeting one's wife.  I had 
come home again - home from unsightly deserts to the green and 
habitable corners of the earth.  Every spire of pine along the 
hill-top, every trouty pool along that mountain river, was more 
dear to me than a blood relation.  Few people have praised God more 
happily than I did.  And thenceforward, down by Blue Canon, Alta, 
Dutch Flat, and all the old mining camps, through a sea of mountain 
forests, dropping thousands of feet toward the far sea-level as we 
went, not I only, but all the passengers on board, threw off their 
sense of dirt and heat and weariness, and bawled like schoolboys, 
and thronged with shining eyes upon the platform and became new 
creatures within and without.  The sun no longer oppressed us with 
heat, it only shone laughingly along the mountain-side, until we 
were fain to laugh ourselves for glee.  At every turn we could see 
farther into the land and our own happy futures.  At every town the 
cocks were tossing their clear notes into the golden air, and 
crowing for the new day and the new country.  For this was indeed 
our destination; this was "the good country" we had been going to 
so long.

By afternoon we were at Sacramento, the city of gardens in a plain 
of corn; and the next day before the dawn we were lying to upon the 
Oakland side of San Francisco Bay.  The day was breaking as we 
crossed the ferry; the fog was rising over the citied hills of San 
Francisco; the bay was perfect - not a ripple, scarce a stain, upon 
its blue expanse; everything was waiting, breathless, for the sun.  
A spot of cloudy gold lit first upon the head of Tamalpais, and 
then widened downward on its shapely shoulder; the air seemed to 
awaken, and began to sparkle; and suddenly

"The tall hills Titan discovered,"

and the city of San Francisco, and the bay of gold and corn, were 
lit from end to end with summer daylight.

[1879.]



CHAPTER II - THE OLD PACIFIC CAPITAL



THE WOODS AND THE PACIFIC


THE Bay of Monterey has been compared by no less a person than 
General Sherman to a bent fishing-hook; and the comparison, if less 
important than the march through Georgia, still shows the eye of a 
soldier for topography.  Santa Cruz sits exposed at the shank; the 
mouth of the Salinas river is at the middle of the bend; and 
Monterey itself is cosily ensconced beside the barb.  Thus the 
ancient capital of California faces across the bay, while the 
Pacific Ocean, though hidden by low hills and forest, bombards her 
left flank and rear with never-dying surf.  In front of the town, 
the long line of sea-beach trends north and north-west, and then 
westward to enclose the bay.  The waves which lap so quietly about 
the jetties of Monterey grow louder and larger in the distance; you 
can see the breakers leaping high and white by day; at night, the 
outline of the shore is traced in transparent silver by the 
moonlight and the flying foam; and from all round, even in quiet 
weather, the distant, thrilling roar of the Pacific hangs over the 
coast and the adjacent country like smoke above a battle.

These long beaches are enticing to the idle man.  It would be hard 
to find a walk more solitary and at the same time more exciting to 
the mind.  Crowds of ducks and sea-gulls hover over the sea.  
Sandpipers trot in and out by troops after the retiring waves, 
trilling together in a chorus of infinitesimal song.  Strange sea-
tangles, new to the European eye, the bones of whales, or sometimes 
a whole whale's carcase, white with carrion-gulls and poisoning the 
wind, lie scattered here and there along the sands.  The waves come 
in slowly, vast and green, curve their translucent necks, and burst 
with a surprising uproar, that runs, waxing and waning, up and down 
the long key-board of the beach.  The foam of these great ruins 
mounts in an instant to the ridge of the sand glacis, swiftly 
fleets back again, and is met and buried by the next breaker.  The 
interest is perpetually fresh.  On no other coast that I know shall 
you enjoy, in calm, sunny weather, such a spectacle of Ocean's 
greatness, such beauty of changing colour, or such degrees of 
thunder in the sound.  The very air is more than usually salt by 
this Homeric deep.

Inshore, a tract of sand-hills borders on the beach.  Here and 
there a lagoon, more or less brackish, attracts the birds and 
hunters.  A rough, undergrowth partially conceals the sand.  The 
crouching, hardy live-oaks flourish singly or in thickets - the 
kind of wood for murderers to crawl among - and here and there the 
skirts of the forest extend downward from the hills with a floor of 
turf and long aisles of pine-trees hung with Spaniard's Beard.  
Through this quaint desert the railway cars drew near to Monterey 
from the junction at Salinas City - though that and so many other 
things are now for ever altered - and it was from here that you had 
the first view of the old township lying in the sands, its white 
windmills bickering in the chill, perpetual wind, and the first 
fogs of the evening drawing drearily around it from the sea.

The one common note of all this country is the haunting presence of 
the ocean.  A great faint sound of breakers follows you high up 
into the inland canons; the roar of water dwells in the clean, 
empty rooms of Monterey as in a shell upon the chimney; go where 
you will, you have but to pause and listen to hear the voice of the 
Pacific.  You pass out of the town to the south-west, and mount the 
hill among pine-woods.  Glade, thicket, and grove surround you.  
You follow winding sandy tracks that lead nowhither.  You see a 
deer; a multitude of quail arises.  But the sound of the sea still 
follows you as you advance, like that of wind among the trees, only 
harsher and stranger to the ear; and when at length you gain the 
summit, out breaks on every hand and with freshened vigour that 
same unending, distant, whispering rumble of the ocean; for now you 
are on the top of Monterey peninsula, and the noise no longer only 
mounts to you from behind along the beach towards Santa Cruz, but 
from your right also, round by Chinatown and Pinos lighthouse, and 
from down before you to the mouth of the Carmello river.  The whole 
woodland is begirt with thundering surges.  The silence that 
immediately surrounds you where you stand is not so much broken as 
it is haunted by this distant, circling rumour.  It sets your 
senses upon edge; you strain your attention; you are clearly and 
unusually conscious of small sounds near at hand; you walk 
listening like an Indian hunter; and that voice of the Pacific is a 
sort of disquieting company to you in your walk.

When once I was in these woods I found it difficult to turn 
homeward.  All woods lure a rambler onward; but in those of 
Monterey it was the surf that particularly invited me to prolong my 
walks.  I would push straight for the shore where I thought it to 
be nearest.  Indeed, there was scarce a direction that would not, 
sooner or later, have brought me forth on the Pacific.  The 
emptiness of the woods gave me a sense of freedom and discovery in 
these excursions.  I never in all my visits met but one man.  He 
was a Mexican, very dark of hue, but smiling and fat, and he 
carried an axe, though his true business at that moment was to seek 
for straying cattle.  I asked him what o'clock it was, but he 
seemed neither to know nor care; and when he in his turn asked me 
for news of his cattle, I showed myself equally indifferent.  We 
stood and smiled upon each other for a few seconds, and then turned 
without a word and took our several ways across the forest.

One day - I shall never forget it - I had taken a trail that was 
new to me.  After a while the woods began to open, the sea to sound 
nearer hand.  I came upon a road, and, to my surprise, a stile.  A 
step or two farther, and, without leaving the woods, I found myself 
among trim houses.  I walked through street after street, parallel 
and at right angles, paved with sward and dotted with trees, but 
still undeniable streets, and each with its name posted at the 
corner, as in a real town.  Facing down the main thoroughfare - 
"Central Avenue," as it was ticketed - I saw an open-air temple, 
with benches and sounding-board, as though for an orchestra.  The 
houses were all tightly shuttered; there was no smoke, no sound but 
of the waves, no moving thing.  I have never been in any place that 
seemed so dreamlike.  Pompeii is all in a bustle with visitors, and 
its antiquity and strangeness deceive the imagination; but this 
town had plainly not been built above a year or two, and perhaps 
had been deserted overnight.  Indeed, it was not so much like a 
deserted town as like a scene upon the stage by daylight, and with 
no one on the boards.  The barking of a dog led me at last to the 
only house still occupied, where a Scotch pastor and his wife pass 
the winter alone in this empty theatre.  The place was "The Pacific 
Camp Grounds, the Christian Seaside Resort."  Thither, in the warm 
season, crowds come to enjoy a life of teetotalism, religion, and 
flirtation, which I am willing to think blameless and agreeable.  
The neighbourhood at least is well selected.  The Pacific booms in 
front.  Westward is Point Pinos, with the lighthouse in a 
wilderness of sand, where you will find the lightkeeper playing the 
piano, making models and bows and arrows, studying dawn and sunrise 
in amateur oil-painting, and with a dozen other elegant pursuits 
and interests to surprise his brave, old-country rivals.  To the 
east, and still nearer, you will come upon a space of open down, a 
hamlet, a haven among rocks, a world of surge and screaming sea-
gulls.  Such scenes are very similar in different climates; they 
appear homely to the eyes of all; to me this was like a dozen spots 
in Scotland.  And yet the boats that ride in the haven are of 
strange outlandish design; and, if you walk into the hamlet, you 
will behold costumes and faces and hear a tongue that are 
unfamiliar to the memory.  The joss-stick burns, the opium pipe is 
smoked, the floors are strewn with slips of coloured paper - 
prayers, you would say, that had somehow missed their destination - 
and a man guiding his upright pencil from right to left across the 
sheet, writes home the news of Monterey to the Celestial Empire.

The woods and the Pacific rule between them the climate of this 
seaboard region.  On the streets of Monterey, when the air does not 
smell salt from the one, it will be blowing perfumed from the 
resinous tree-tops of the other.  For days together a hot, dry air 
will overhang the town, close as from an oven, yet healthful and 
aromatic in the nostrils.  The cause is not far to seek, for the 
woods are afire, and the hot wind is blowing from the hills.  These 
fires are one of the great dangers of California.  I have seen from 
Monterey as many as three at the same time, by day a cloud of 
smoke, by night a red coal of conflagration in the distance.  A 
little thing will start them, and, if the wind be favourable, they 
gallop over miles of country faster than a horse.  The inhabitants 
must turn out and work like demons, for it is not only the pleasant 
groves that are destroyed; the climate and the soil are equally at 
stake, and these fires prevent the rains of the next winter and dry 
up perennial fountains.  California has been a land of promise in 
its time, like Palestine; but if the woods continue so swiftly to 
perish, it may become, like Palestine, a land of desolation.

To visit the woods while they are languidly burning is a strange 
piece of experience.  The fire passes through the underbrush at a 
run.  Every here and there a tree flares up instantaneously from 
root to summit, scattering tufts of flame, and is quenched, it 
seems, as quickly.  But this last is only in semblance.  For after 
this first squib-like conflagration of the dry moss and twigs, 
there remains behind a deep-rooted and consuming fire in the very 
entrails of the tree.  The resin of the pitch-pine is principally 
condensed at the base of the bole and in the spreading roots.  
Thus, after the light, showy, skirmishing flames, which are only as 
the match to the explosion, have already scampered down the wind 
into the distance, the true harm is but beginning for this giant of 
the woods.  You may approach the tree from one side, and see it 
scorched indeed from top to bottom, but apparently survivor of the 
peril.  Make the circuit, and there, on the other side of the 
column, is a clear mass of living coal, spreading like an ulcer; 
while underground, to their most extended fibre, the roots are 
being eaten out by fire, and the smoke is rising through the 
fissures to the surface.  A little while, and, without a nod of 
warning, the huge pine-tree snaps off short across the ground and 
falls prostrate with a crash.  Meanwhile the fire continues its 
silent business; the roots are reduced to a fine ash; and long 
afterwards, if you pass by, you will find the earth pierced with 
radiating galleries, and preserving the design of all these 
subterranean spurs, as though it were the mould for a new tree 
instead of the print of an old one.  These pitch-pines of Monterey 
are, with the single exception of the Monterey cypress, the most 
fantastic of forest trees.  No words can give an idea of the 
contortion of their growth; they might figure without change in a 
circle of the nether hell as Dante pictured it; and at the rate at 
which trees grow, and at which forest fires spring up and gallop 
through the hills of California, we may look forward to a time when 
there will not be one of them left standing in that land of their 
nativity.  At least they have not so much to fear from the axe, but 
perish by what may be called a natural although a violent death; 
while it is man in his short-sighted greed that robs the country of 
the nobler redwood.  Yet a little while and perhaps all the hills 
of seaboard California may be as bald as Tamalpais.

I have an interest of my own in these forest fires, for I came so 
near to lynching on one occasion, that a braver man might have 
retained a thrill from the experience.  I wished to be certain 
whether it was the moss, that quaint funereal ornament of 
Californian forests, which blazed up so rapidly when the flame 
first touched the tree.  I suppose I must have been under the 
influence of Satan, for instead of plucking off a piece for my 
experiment what should I do but walk up to a great pine-tree in a 
portion of the wood which had escaped so much as scorching, strike 
a match, and apply the flame gingerly to one of the tassels.  The 
tree went off simply like a rocket; in three seconds it was a 
roaring pillar of fire.  Close by I could hear the shouts of those 
who were at work combating the original conflagration.  I could see 
the waggon that had brought them tied to a live oak in a piece of 
open; I could even catch the flash of an axe as it swung up through 
the underwood into the sunlight.  Had any one observed the result 
of my experiment my neck was literally not worth a pinch of snuff; 
after a few minutes of passionate expostulation I should have been 
run up to convenient bough.

To die for faction is a common evil;
But to be hanged for nonsense is the devil.

I have run repeatedly, but never as I ran that day.  At night I 
went out of town, and there was my own particular fire, quite 
distinct from the other, and burning as I thought with even greater 
vigour.

But it is the Pacific that exercises the most direct and obvious 
power upon the climate.  At sunset, for months together, vast, wet, 
melancholy fogs arise and come shoreward from the ocean.  From the 
hill-top above Monterey the scene is often noble, although it is 
always sad.  The upper air is still bright with sunlight; a glow 
still rests upon the Gabelano Peak; but the fogs are in possession 
of the lower levels; they crawl in scarves among the sandhills; 
they float, a little higher, in clouds of a gigantic size and often 
of a wild configuration; to the south, where they have struck the 
seaward shoulder of the mountains of Santa Lucia, they double back 
and spire up skyward like smoke.  Where their shadow touches, 
colour dies out of the world.  The air grows chill and deadly as 
they advance.  The trade-wind freshens, the trees begin to sigh, 
and all the windmills in Monterey are whirling and creaking and 
filling their cisterns with the brackish water of the sands.  It 
takes but a little while till the invasion is complete.  The sea, 
in its lighter order, has submerged the earth.  Monterey is 
curtained in for the night in thick, wet, salt, and frigid clouds, 
so to remain till day returns; and before the sun's rays they 
slowly disperse and retreat in broken squadrons to the bosom of the 
sea.  And yet often when the fog is thickest and most chill, a few 
steps out of the town and up the slope, the night will be dry and 
warm and full of inland perfume.


MEXICANS, AMERICANS, AND INDIANS


The history of Monterey has yet to be written.  Founded by Catholic 
missionaries, a place of wise beneficence to Indians, a place of 
arms, a Mexican capital continually wrested by one faction from 
another, an American capital when the first House of 
Representatives held its deliberations, and then falling lower and 
lower from the capital of the State to the capital of a county, and 
from that again, by the loss of its charter and town lands, to a 
mere bankrupt village, its rise and decline is typical of that of 
all Mexican institutions and even Mexican families in California.

Nothing is stranger in that strange State than the rapidity with 
which the soil has changed-hands.  The Mexicans, you may say, are 
all poor and landless, like their former capital; and yet both it 
and they hold themselves apart and preserve their ancient customs 
and something of their ancient air.

The town, when I was there, was a place of two or three streets, 
economically paved with sea-sand, and two or three lanes, which 
were watercourses in the rainy season, and were, at all times, rent 
up by fissures four or five feet deep.  There were no street 
lights.  Short sections of wooden sidewalk only added to the 
dangers of the night, for they were often high above the level of 
the roadway, and no one could tell where they would be likely to 
begin or end.  The houses were, for the most part, built of unbaked 
adobe brick, many of them old for so new a country, some of very 
elegant proportions, with low, spacious, shapely rooms, and walls 
so thick that the heat of summer never dried them to the heart.  At 
the approach of the rainy season a deathly chill and a graveyard 
smell began to hang about the lower floors; and diseases of the 
chest are common and fatal among house-keeping people of either 
sex.

There was no activity but in and around the saloons, where people 
sat almost all day long playing cards.  The smallest excursion was 
made on horseback.  You would scarcely ever see the main street 
without a horse or two tied to posts, and making a fine figure with 
their Mexican housings.  It struck me oddly to come across some of 
the CORNHILL illustrations to Mr. Blackmore's EREMA, and see all 
the characters astride on English saddles.  As a matter of fact, an 
English saddle is a rarity even in San Francisco, and, you may say, 
a thing unknown in all the rest of California.  In a place so 
exclusively Mexican as Monterey, you saw not only Mexican saddles 
but true Vaquero riding - men always at the hand-gallop up hill and 
down dale, and round the sharpest corner, urging their horses with 
cries and gesticulations and cruel rotatory spurs, checking them 
dead with a touch, or wheeling them right-about-face in a square 
yard.  The type of face and character of bearing are surprisingly 
un-American.  The first ranged from something like the pure 
Spanish, to something, in its sad fixity, not unlike the pure 
Indian, although I do not suppose there was one pure blood of 
either race in all the country.  As for the second, it was a matter 
of perpetual surprise to find, in that world of absolutely 
mannerless Americans, a people full of deportment, solemnly 
courteous, and doing all things with grace and decorum.  In dress 
they ran to colour and bright sashes.  Not even the most 
Americanised could always resist the temptation to stick a red rose 
into his hat-band.  Not even the most Americanised would descend to 
wear the vile dress hat of civilisation.  Spanish was the language 
of the streets.  It was difficult to get along without a word or 
two of that language for an occasion.  The only communications in 
which the population joined were with a view to amusement.  A 
weekly public ball took place with great etiquette, in addition to 
the numerous fandangoes in private houses.  There was a really fair 
amateur brass band.  Night after night serenaders would be going 
about the street, sometimes in a company and with several 
instruments and voice together, sometimes severally, each guitar 
before a different window.  It was a strange thing to lie awake in 
nineteenth-century America, and hear the guitar accompany, and one 
of these old, heart-breaking Spanish love-songs mount into the 
night air, perhaps in a deep baritone, perhaps in that high-
pitched, pathetic, womanish alto which is so common among Mexican 
men, and which strikes on the unaccustomed ear as something not 
entirely human but altogether sad.

The town, then, was essentially and wholly Mexican; and yet almost 
all the land in the neighbourhood was held by Americans, and it was 
from the same class, numerically so small, that the principal 
officials were selected.  This Mexican and that Mexican would 
describe to you his old family estates, not one rood of which 
remained to him.  You would ask him how that came about, and elicit 
some tangled story back-foremost, from which you gathered that the 
Americans had been greedy like designing men, and the Mexicans 
greedy like children, but no other certain fact.  Their merits and 
their faults contributed alike to the ruin of the former 
landholders.  It is true they were improvident, and easily dazzled 
with the sight of ready money; but they were gentlefolk besides, 
and that in a way which curiously unfitted them to combat Yankee 
craft.  Suppose they have a paper to sign, they would think it a 
reflection on the other party to examine the terms with any great 
minuteness; nay, suppose them to observe some doubtful clause, it 
is ten to one they would refuse from delicacy to object to it.  I 
know I am speaking within the mark, for I have seen such a case 
occur, and the Mexican, in spite of the advice of his lawyer, has 
signed the imperfect paper like a lamb.  To have spoken in the 
matter, he said, above all to have let the other party guess that 
he had seen a lawyer, would have "been like doubting his word."  
The scruple sounds oddly to one of ourselves, who have been brought 
up to understand all business as a competition in fraud, and 
honesty itself to be a virtue which regards the carrying out but 
not the creation of agreements.  This single unworldly trait will 
account for much of that revolution of which we are speaking.  The 
Mexicans have the name of being great swindlers, but certainly the 
accusation cuts both ways.  In a contest of this sort, the entire 
booty would scarcely have passed into the hands of the more 
scupulous race.

Physically the Americans have triumphed; but it is not entirely 
seen how far they have themselves been morally conquered.  This is, 
of course, but a part of a part of an extraordinary problem now in 
the course of being solved in the various States of the American 
Union.  I am reminded of an anecdote.  Some years ago, at a great 
sale of wine, all the odd lots were purchased by a grocer in a 
small way in the old town of Edinburgh.  The agent had the 
curiosity to visit him some time after and inquire what possible 
use he could have for such material.  He was shown, by way of 
answer, a huge vat where all the liquors, from humble Gladstone to 
imperial Tokay, were fermenting together.  "And what," he asked, 
"do you propose to call this?"  "I'm no very sure," replied the 
grocer, "but I think it's going to turn out port."  In the older 
Eastern States, I think we may say that this hotch-potch of races 
in going to turn out English, or thereabout.  But the problem is 
indefinitely varied in other zones.  The elements are differently 
mingled in the south, in what we may call the Territorial belt and 
in the group of States on the Pacific coast.  Above all, in these 
last, we may look to see some monstrous hybrid - Whether good or 
evil, who shall forecast? but certainly original and all their own.  
In my little restaurant at Monterey, we have sat down to table day 
after day, a Frenchman, two Portuguese, an Italian, a Mexican, and 
a Scotchman:  we had for common visitors an American from Illinois, 
a nearly pure blood Indian woman, and a naturalised Chinese; and 
from time to time a Switzer and a German came down from country 
ranches for the night.  No wonder that the Pacific coast is a 
foreign land to visitors from the Eastern States, for each race 
contributes something of its own.  Even the despised Chinese have 
taught the youth of California, none indeed of their virtues, but 
the debasing use of opium.  And chief among these influences is 
that of the Mexicans.

The Mexicans although in the State are out of it.  They still 
preserve a sort of international independence, and keep their 
affairs snug to themselves.  Only four or five years ago Vasquez, 
the bandit, his troops being dispersed and the hunt too hot for him 
in other parts of California, returned to his native Monterey, and 
was seen publicly in her streets and saloons, fearing no man.  The 
year that I was there, there occurred two reputed murders.  As the 
Montereyans are exceptionally vile speakers of each other and of 
every one behind his back, it is not possible for me to judge how 
much truth there may have been in these reports; but in the one 
case every one believed, and in the other some suspected, that 
there had been foul play; and nobody dreamed for an instant of 
taking the authorities into their counsel.  Now this is, of course, 
characteristic enough of the Mexicans; but it is a noteworthy 
feature that all the Americans in Monterey acquiesced without a 
word in this inaction.  Even when I spoke to them upon the subject, 
they seemed not to understand my surprise; they had forgotten the 
traditions of their own race and upbringing, and become, in a word, 
wholly Mexicanised.

Again, the Mexicans, having no ready money to speak of, rely almost 
entirely in their business transactions upon each other's worthless 
paper.  Pedro the penniless pays you with an I O U from the equally 
penniless Miguel.  It is a sort of local currency by courtesy.  
Credit in these parts has passed into a superstition.  I have seen 
a strong, violent man struggling for months to recover a debt, and 
getting nothing but an exchange of waste paper.  The very 
storekeepers are averse to asking for cash payments, and are more 
surprised than pleased when they are offered.  They fear there must 
be something under it, and that you mean to withdraw your custom 
from them.  I have seen the enterprising chemist and stationer 
begging me with fervour to let my account run on, although I had my 
purse open in my hand; and partly from the commonness of the case, 
partly from some remains of that generous old Mexican tradition 
which made all men welcome to their tables, a person may be 
notoriously both unwilling and unable to pay, and still find credit 
for the necessaries of life in the stores of Monterey.  Now this 
villainous habit of living upon "tick" has grown into Californian 
nature.  I do not mean that the American and European storekeepers 
of Monterey are as lax as Mexicans; I mean that American farmers in 
many parts of the State expect unlimited credit, and profit by it 
in the meanwhile, without a thought for consequences.  Jew 
storekeepers have already learned the advantage to be gained from 
this; they lead on the farmer into irretrievable indebtedness, and 
keep him ever after as their bond-slave hopelessly grinding in the 
mill.  So the whirligig of time brings in its revenges, and except 
that the Jew knows better than to foreclose, you may see Americans 
bound in the same chains with which they themselves had formerly 
bound the Mexican.  It seems as if certain sorts of follies, like 
certain sorts of grain, were natural to the soil rather than to the 
race that holds and tills it for the moment.

In the meantime, however, the Americans rule in Monterey County.  
The new county seat, Salinas City, in the bald, corn-bearing plain 
under the Gabelano Peak, is a town of a purely American character.  
The land is held, for the most part, in those enormous tracts which 
are another legacy of Mexican days, and form the present chief 
danger and disgrace of California; and the holders are mostly of 
American or British birth.  We have here in England no idea of the 
troubles and inconveniences which flow from the existence of these 
large landholders - land-thieves, land-sharks, or land-grabbers, 
they are more commonly and plainly called.  Thus the townlands of 
Monterey are all in the hands of a single man.  How they came there 
is an obscure, vexatious question, and, rightly or wrongly, the man 
is hated with a great hatred.  His life has been repeatedly in 
danger.  Not very long ago, I was told, the stage was stopped and 
examined three evenings in succession by disguised horsemen 
thirsting for his blood.  A certain house on the Salinas road, they 
say, he always passes in his buggy at full speed, for the squatter 
sent him warning long ago.  But a year since he was publicly 
pointed out for death by no less a man than Mr. Dennis Kearney.  
Kearney is a man too well known in California, but a word of 
explanation is required for English readers.  Originally an Irish 
dray-man, he rose, by his command of bad language, to almost 
dictatorial authority in the State; throned it there for six months 
or so, his mouth full of oaths, gallowses, and conflagrations; was 
first snuffed out last winter by Mr. Coleman, backed by his San 
Francisco Vigilantes and three gatling guns; completed his own ruin 
by throwing in his lot with the grotesque Green-backer party; and 
had at last to be rescued by his old enemies, the police, out of 
the hands of his rebellious followers.  It was while he was at the 
top of his fortune that Kearney visited Monterey with his battle-
cry against Chinese labour, the railroad monopolists, and the land-
thieves; and his one articulate counsel to the Montereyans was to 
"hang David Jacks."  Had the town been American, in my private 
opinion, this would have been done years ago.  Land is a subject on 
which there is no jesting in the West, and I have seen my friend 
the lawyer drive out of Monterey to adjust a competition of titles 
with the face of a captain going into battle and his Smith-and-
Wesson convenient to his hand.

On the ranche of another of these landholders you may find our old 
friend, the truck system, in full operation.  Men live there, year 
in year out, to cut timber for a nominal wage, which is all 
consumed in supplies.  The longer they remain in this desirable 
service the deeper they will fall in debt - a burlesque injustice 
in a new country, where labour should be precious, and one of those 
typical instances which explains the prevailing discontent and the 
success of the demagogue Kearney.

In a comparison between what was and what is in California, the 
praisers of times past will fix upon the Indians of Carmel.  The 
valley drained by the river so named is a true Californian valley, 
bare, dotted with chaparal, overlooked by quaint, unfinished hills.  
The Carmel runs by many pleasant farms, a clear and shallow river, 
loved by wading kine; and at last, as it is falling towards a 
quicksand and the great Pacific, passes a ruined mission on a hill.  
From the mission church the eye embraces a great field of ocean, 
and the ear is filled with a continuous sound of distant breakers 
on the shore.  But the day of the Jesuit has gone by, the day of 
the Yankee has succeeded, and there is no one left to care for the 
converted savage.  The church is roofless and ruinous, sea-breezes 
and sea-fogs, and the alternation of the rain and sunshine, daily 
widening the breaches and casting the crockets from the wall.  As 
an antiquity in this new land, a quaint specimen of missionary 
architecture, and a memorial of good deeds, it had a triple claim 
to preservation from all thinking people; but neglect and abuse 
have been its portion.  There is no sign of American interference, 
save where a headboard has been torn from a grave to be a mark for 
pistol bullets.  So it is with the Indians for whom it was erected.  
Their lands, I was told, are being yearly encroached upon by the 
neighbouring American proprietor, and with that exception no man 
troubles his head for the Indians of Carmel.  Only one day in the 
year, the day before our Guy Fawkes, the PADRE drives over the hill 
from Monterey; the little sacristy, which is the only covered 
portion of the church, is filled with seats and decorated for the 
service; the Indians troop together, their bright dresses 
contrasting with their dark and melancholy faces; and there, among 
a crowd of somewhat unsympathetic holiday-makers, you may hear God 
served with perhaps more touching circumstances than in any other 
temple under heaven.  An Indian, stone-blind and about eighty years 
of age, conducts the singing; other Indians compose the choir; yet 
they have the Gregorian music at their finger ends, and pronounce 
the Latin so correctly that I could follow the meaning as they 
sang.  The pronunciation was odd and nasal, the singing hurried and 
staccato.  "In saecula saeculoho-horum," they went, with a vigorous 
aspirate to every additional syllable.  I have never seen faces 
more vividly lit up with joy than the faces of these Indian 
singers.  It was to them not only the worship of God, nor an act by 
which they recalled and commemorated better days, but was besides 
an exercise of culture, where all they knew of art and letters was 
united and expressed.  And it made a man's heart sorry for the good 
fathers of yore who had taught them to dig and to reap, to read and 
to sing, who had given them European mass-books which they still 
preserve and study in their cottages, and who had now passed away 
from all authority and influence in that land - to be succeeded by 
greedy land-thieves and sacrilegious pistol-shots.  So ugly a thing 
may our Anglo-Saxon Protestantism appear beside the doings of the 
Society of Jesus.

But revolution in this world succeeds to revolution.  All that I 
say in this paper is in a paulo-past tense.  The Monterey of last 
year exists no longer.  A huge hotel has sprung up in the desert by 
the railway.  Three sets of diners sit down successively to table.  
Invaluable toilettes figure along the beach and between the live 
oaks; and Monterey is advertised in the newspapers, and posted in 
the waiting-rooms at railway stations, as a resort for wealth and 
fashion.  Alas for the little town! it is not strong enough to 
resist the influence of the flaunting caravanserai, and the poor, 
quaint, penniless native gentlemen of Monterey must perish, like a 
lower race, before the millionaire vulgarians of the Big Bonanza.


Back to Full Books