Adventures among BooksbyAndrew Lang

one's liking for the verses of a Tweedside angler, of a poet whose
forebears lie in the green kirkyard of Yarrow.  But, allowing for
all this, I cannot but think these very musical, accomplished, and,
in their place, appropriate verses, to have been written by a boy
of twenty.  Nor is it a common imagination, though busy in this
vulgar field of horrors, that lifts the pallid bride to look upon
the mirror of the sea -


"And bids her gaze into the startled sea,
And says, 'Thine image, from eternity,
Hath come to meet thee, ladye!' and anon
He bade the cold corse kiss the shadowy one
That shook amid the waters."


The picture of the madness of thirst, allied to the disease of the
brain, is extremely powerful, the delirious monk tells the salt sea
waves


"That ye have power, and passion, and a sound
As of the flying of an angel round
The mighty world; that ye are one with time!"


Here, I can't but think, is imagination.

Mr. Aytoun, however, noted none of those passages, nor that where,
in tempest and thunder, a shipwrecked sailor swims to the strange
boat, sees the Living Love and the Dead, and falls back into the
trough of the wave.  But even the friendly pencil of Bon Gaultier
approves the passage where an isle rises above the sea, and the
boat is lightly stranded on the shore of pure and silver shells.
The horrors of corruption, in the Third Chimera, may be left
unquoted, Aytoun parodies -


"The chalk, the chalk, the cheese, the cheese, the cheeses,
And straightway dropped he down upon his kneeses."


Julio comes back to reason, hates the dreadful bride, and feeds on
limpets, "by the mass, he feasteth well!"

There was a holy hermit on the isle,


"I ween like other hermits, so was he."


He is Agathe's father, and he has retired to an eligible island
where he may repent his cruelty to his daughter.  Julio tells his
tale, and goes mad again.  The apostrophe to Lunacy which follows
is marked "Beautiful" by Aytoun, and is in the spirit of Charles
Lamb's remark that madness has pleasures unknown to the sane.


"Thou art, thou art alone,
A pure, pure being, but the God on high
Is with thee ever as thou goest by."


Julio watches again beside the Dead, till morning comes, bringing


"A murmur far and far, of those that stirred
Within the great encampment of the sea."


The tide sweeps the mad and the dead down the shores.  "He perished
in a dream."  As for the Hermit, he buried them, not knowing who
they were, but on a later day found and recognised the golden cross
of Agathe,


"For long ago he gave that blessed cross
To his fair girl, and knew the relic still."


So the Hermit died of remorse, and one cannot say, with Walton,
"and I hope the reader is sorry."

The "other poems" are vague memories of Shelley, or anticipations
of Poe.  One of them is curiously styled "Her, a Statue," and
contains a passage that reminds us of a rubaiyat of Omar's,


"She might see
A love-wing'd Seraph glide in glory by,
Striking the tent of its mortality.

"But that is but a tent wherein may rest
A Sultan to the realm of Death addrest;
The Sultan rises, and the dark Ferrash
Strikes, and prepares it for another guest."


Most akin to Poe is the "Hymn to Orion,"


"Dost thou, in thy vigil, hail
Arcturus on his chariot pale,
Leading him with a fiery flight -
Over the hollow hill of night?"


This, then, is a hasty sketch, and incomplete, of a book which,
perhaps, is only a curiosity, but which, I venture to think, gave
promise of a poet.  Where is the lad of twenty who has written as
well to-day--nay, where is the mature person of forty?  There was a
wind of poetry abroad in 1830, blowing over the barricades of
Paris, breathing by the sedges of Cam, stirring the heather on the
hills of Yarrow.  Hugo, Mr. Browning, Lord Tennyson, caught the
breeze in their sails, and were borne adown the Tigris of romance.
But the breath that stirred the loch where Tom Stoddart lay and
mused in his boat, soon became to him merely the curl on the waters
of lone St. Mary's or Loch Skene, and he began casting over the
great uneducated trout of a happier time, forgetful of the Muse.
He wrote another piece, with a sonorous and delightful title,
"Ajalon of the Winds."  Where is "Ajalon of the Winds"?  Miss
Stoddart knows nothing of it, but I fancy that the thrice-loathed
Betty could have told a tale.


MALIM CONVIVIS QVAM PLACVISSE COQVIS.


We need not, perhaps, regret that Mr. Stoddart withdrew from the
struggles and competitions of poetic literature.  No very high
place, no very glorious crown, one fancies, would have been his.
His would have been anxiety, doubt of self, disappointment, or, if
he succeeded, the hatred, and envyings, and lies which even then
dogged the steps of the victor.  It was better to be quiet and go
a-fishing.


"Sorrow, sorrow speed away
To our angler's quiet mound,
With the old pilgrim, twilight gray,
Enter through the holy ground;
There he sleeps whose heart is twined
With wild stream and wandering burn,
Wooer of the western wind
Watcher of the April morn!"



CHAPTER VIII:  THE CONFESSIONS OF SAINT AUGUSTINE



My copy of the Confessions is a dark little book, "a size
uncumbersome to the nicest hand," in the format of an Elzevir,
bound in black morocco, and adorned with "blind-tooled," that is
ungilt, skulls and crossbones.  It has lost the title-page with the
date, but retains the frontispiece, engraved by Huret.  Saint
Augustine, in his mitre and other episcopal array, with a quill in
his hand, sits under a flood of inspiring sunshine.  The dumpy book
has been much read, was at some time the property of Mr. John
Philips, and bears one touching manuscript note, of which more
hereafter.  It is, I presume, a copy of the translation by Sir Toby
Matthew.  The author of the Preface declares, with truth, that the
translator "hath consulted so closely and earnestly with the saint
that he seemeth to have lighted his torch att his fire, and to
speak in the best and most significant English, what and how he
would have done had he understood our language."

There can be no better English version of this famous book, in
which Saint Augustine tells the story of his eager and passionate
youth--a youth tossed about by the contending tides of Love, human
and divine.  Reading it to-day, with a mundane curiosity, we may
half regret the space which he gives to theological metaphysics,
and his brief tantalising glimpses of what most interests us now--
the common life of men when the Church was becoming mistress of the
world, when the old Religions were dying of allegory and moral
interpretations and occult dreams.  But, even so, Saint Augustine's
interest in himself, in the very obscure origins of each human
existence, in the psychology of infancy and youth, in school
disputes, and magical pretensions; his ardent affections, his
exultations, and his faults, make his memoirs immortal among the
unveilings of the spirit.  He has studied babies, that he may know
his dark beginnings, and the seeds of grace and of evil.  "Then, by
degrees, I began to find where I was; and I had certain desires to
declare my will to those by whom it might be executed.  But I could
not do it, . . . therefore would I be tossing my arms, and sending
out certain cryes, . . . and when they obeyed me not . . . I would
fall into a rage, and that not against such as were my subjects or
servants, but against my Elders and my betters, and I would revenge
myself upon them by crying."  He has observed that infants "begin
to laugh, first sleeping, and then shortly waking;" a curious note,
but he does not ask wherefore the sense of humour, or the
expression of it, comes to children first in their slumber.  Of
what do babies dream?  And what do the nested swallows chirrup to
each other in their sleep?

"Such have I understood that such infants are as I could know, and
such have I been told that I was by them who brought me up, though
even they may rather be accounted not to know, than to know these
things."  One thing he knows, "that even infancy is subject to
sin."  From the womb we are touched with evil.  "Myselfe have seene
and observed some little child, who could not speake; and yet he
was all in an envious kind of wrath, looking pale with a bitter
countenance upon his foster-brother."  In an envious kind of wrath!
Is it not the motive of half our politics, and too much of our
criticism?  Such is man's inborn nature, not to be cured by laws or
reforms, not to be washed out of his veins, though "blood be shed
like rain, and tears like a mist."  For "an infant cannot endure a
companion to feed with him in a fountain of milk which is richly
abounding and overflowing, although that companion be wholly
destitute, and can take no other food but that."  This is the
Original Sin, inherited, innate, unacquired; for this are "babes
span-long" to suffer, as the famous or infamous preacher declared.
"Where, or at what time, was I ever innocent?" he cries, and hears
no answer from "the dark backward and abysm" of the pre-natal life.

Then the Saint describes a child's learning to speak; how he
amasses verbal tokens of things, "having tamed, and, as it were,
broken my mouth to the pronouncing of them."  "And so I began to
launch out more deeply into the tempestuous traffique and society
of mankind."  Tempestuous enough he found or made it--this child of
a Pagan father and a Christian saint, Monica, the saint of
Motherhood.  The past generations had "chalked out certain
laborious ways of learning," and, perhaps, Saint Augustine never
forgave the flogging pedagogue--the plagosus Orbilius of his
boyhood.  Long before his day he had found out that the sorrows of
children, and their joys, are no less serious than the sorrows of
mature age.  "Is there, Lord, any man of so great a mind that he
can think lightly of those racks, and hooks, and other torments,
for the avoiding whereof men pray unto Thee with great fear from
one end of the world to the other, as that he can make sport at
such as doe most sharply inflict these things upon them, as our
parents laughed at the torments which we children susteyned at our
master's hands?"  Can we suppose that Monica laughed, or was it
only the heathen father who approved of "roughing it?"  "Being yet
a childe, I began to beg Thy ayde and succour; and I did loosen the
knots of my tongue in praying Thee; and I begged, being yet a
little one, with no little devotion, that I might not be beaten at
the schoole."  One is reminded of Tom Tulliver, who gave up even
praying that he might learn one part of his work:  "Please make
Mr.--say that I am not to do mathematics."

The Saint admits that he lacked neither memory nor wit, "but he
took delight in playing."  "The plays and toys of men are called
business, yet, when children fall unto them, the same men punish
them."  Yet the schoolmaster was "more fed upon by rage," if beaten
in any little question of learning, than the boy; "if in any match
at Ball I had been maistered by one of my playfellows."  He
"aspired proudly to be victorious in the matches which he made,"
and I seriously regret to say that he would buy a match, and pay
his opponent to lose when he could not win fairly.  He liked
romances also, "to have myne eares scratched with lying fables"--a
"lazy, idle boy," like him who dallied with Rebecca and Rowena in
the holidays of Charter House.

Saint Augustine, like Sir Walter Scott at the University of
Edinburgh, was "The Greek Dunce."  Both of these great men, to
their sorrow and loss, absolutely and totally declined to learn
Greek.  "But what the reason was why I hated the Greeke language,
while I was taught it, being a child, I do not yet understand."
The Saint was far from being alone in that distaste, and he who
writes loathed Greek like poison--till he came to Homer.  Latin the
Saint loved, except "when reading, writing, and casting of accounts
was taught in Latin, which I held not for lesse paynefull or penal
than the very Greeke.  I wept for Dido's death, who made herselfe
away with the sword," he declares, "and even so, the saying that
two and two makes foure was an ungrateful song in mine ears;
whereas the wooden horse full of armed men, the burning of Troy,
and the very Ghost of Creusa, was a most delightful spectacle of
vanity."

In short, the Saint was a regular Boy--a high-spirited, clever,
sportive, and wilful creature.  He was as fond as most boys of the
mythical tales, "and for that I was accounted to be a towardly
boy."  Meanwhile he does not record that Monica disliked his
learning the foolish dear old heathen fables--"that flood of hell!"

Boyhood gave place to youth, and, allowing for the vanity of self-
accusation, there can be little doubt that the youth of Saint
Augustine was une jeunesse orageuse.  "And what was that wherein I
took delight but to love and to be beloved."  There was ever much
sentiment and affection in his amours, but his soul "could not
distinguish the beauty of chast love from the muddy darkness of
lust.  Streams of them did confusedly boyl in me"--in his African
veins.  "With a restless kind of weariness" he pursued that Other
Self of the Platonic dream, neglecting the Love of God:


"Oh, how late art thou come, O my Joy!"


The course of his education--for the Bar, as we should say--carried
him from home to Carthage, where he rapidly forgot the pure
counsels of his mother "as old wife's consailes."  "And we
delighted in doing ill, not only for the pleasure of the fact, but
even for the affection of prayse."  Even Monica, it seems,
justified the saying:


"Every woman is at heart a Rake."


Marriage would have been his making, Saint Augustine says, "but she
desired not even that so very much, lest the cloggs of a wife might
have hindered her hopes of me . . . In the meantime the reins were
loosed to me beyond reason."  Yet the sin which he regrets most
bitterly was nothing more dreadful than the robbery of an orchard!
Pears he had in plenty, none the less he went, with a band of
roisterers, and pillaged another man's pear tree.  "I loved the
sin, not that which I obtained by the same, but I loved the sin
itself."  There lay the sting of it!  They were not even unusually
excellent pears.  "A Peare tree ther was, neere our vineyard, heavy
loaden with fruite, which tempted not greatly either the sight or
tast.  To the shaking and robbing thereof, certaine most wicked
youthes (whereof I was one) went late at night.  We carried away
huge burthens of fruit from thence, not for our owne eating, but to
be cast before the hoggs."

Oh, moonlit night of Africa, and orchard by these wild seabanks
where once Dido stood; oh, laughter of boys among the shaken
leaves, and sound of falling fruit; how do you live alone out of so
many nights that no man remembers?  For Carthage is destroyed,
indeed, and forsaken of the sea, yet that one hour of summer is to
be unforgotten while man has memory of the story of his past.

Nothing of this, to be sure, is in the mind of the Saint, but a
long remorse for this great sin, which he earnestly analyses.  Nor
is he so penitent but that he is clear-sighted, and finds the
spring of his mis-doing in the Sense of Humour!  "It was a delight
and laughter which tickled us, even at the very hart, to find that
we were upon the point of deceiving them who feared no such thing
from us, and who, if they had known it, would earnestly have
procured the contrary."

Saint Augustine admits that he lived with a fast set, as people say
now--"the Depravers" or "Destroyers"; though he loved them little,
"whose actions I ever did abhor, that is, their Destruction of
others, amongst whom I yet lived with a kind of shameless
bashfulness."  In short, the "Hell-Fire Club" of that day numbered
a reluctant Saint among its members!  It was no Christian gospel,
but the Hortensius of Cicero which won him from this perilous
society.  "It altered my affection, and made me address my prayers
to Thee, O Lord, and gave me other desires and purposes than I had
before.  All vain hopes did instantly grow base in myne eyes, and I
did, with an incredible heat of hart, aspire towards the
Immortality of Wisdom."  Thus it was really "Saint Tully," and not
the mystic call of Tolle! Lege! that "converted" Augustine,
diverting the current of his life into the channel of
Righteousness.  "How was I kindled then, oh, my God, with a desire
to fly from earthly things towards Thee."

There now remained only the choice of a Road.  Saint Augustine
dates his own conversion from the day of his turning to the strait
Christian orthodoxy.  Even the Platonic writings, had he known
Greek, would not have satisfied his desire.  "For where was that
Charity that buildeth upon the foundation of Humility, which is
Christ Jesus? . . . These pages" (of the Platonists) "carried not
in them this countenance of piety--the tears of confession, and
that sacrifice of Thine which is an afflicted spirit, a contrite
and humbled heart, the salvation of Thy people, the Spouse, the
City, the pledge of Thy Holy Spirit, the Cup of our Redemption.  No
man doth there thus express himself.  Shall not my soul be subject
to God, for of Him is my salvation?  For He is my God, and my
salvation, my protectour; I shall never be moved.  No man doth
there once call and say to him:  'Come unto me all you that
labour.'"

The heathen doctors had not the grace which Saint Augustine
instinctively knew he lacked--the grace of Humility, nor the
Comfort that is not from within but from without.  To these he
aspired; let us follow him on the path by which he came within
their influence; but let us not forget that the guide on the way to
the City was kind, clever, wordy, vain old Marcus Tullius Cicero.
It is to the City that all our faces should be set, if we knew what
belongs to our peace; thither we cast fond, hopeless, backward
glances, even if we be of those whom Tertullian calls "Saint
Satan's Penitents."  Here, in Augustine, we meet a man who found
the path--one of the few who have found it, of the few who have won
that Love which is our only rest.  It may be worth while to follow
him to the journey's end.

The treatise of Cicero, then, inflamed Augustine "to the loving and
seeking and finding and holding and inseparably embracing of wisdom
itself, wheresoever it was."  Yet, when he looked for wisdom in the
Christian Scriptures, all the literary man, the rhetorician in him,
was repelled by the simplicity of the style.  Without going further
than Mr. Pater's book, "Marius, the Epicurean," and his account of
Apuleius, an English reader may learn what kind of style a learned
African of that date found not too simple.  But Cicero, rather than
Apuleius, was Augustine's ideal; that verbose and sonorous
eloquence captivated him, as it did the early scholars when
learning revived.  Augustine had dallied a little with the sect of
the Manichees, which appears to have grieved his mother more than
his wild life.

But she was comforted by a vision, when she found herself in a
wood, and met "a glorious young man," who informed her that "where
she was there should her son be also."  Curious it is to think that
this very semblance of a glorious young man haunts the magical
dreams of heathen Red Indians, advising them where they shall find
game, and was beheld in such ecstasies by John Tanner, a white man
who lived with the Indians, and adopted their religion.  The Greeks
would have called this appearance Hermes, even in this guise
Odysseus met him in the oak wood of Circe's Isle.  But Augustine
was not yet in his mother's faith; he still taught and studied
rhetoric, contending for its prizes, but declining to be aided by a
certain wizard of his acquaintance.  He had entered as a competitor
for a "Tragicall poeme," but was too sportsmanlike to seek victory
by art necromantic.  Yet he followed after Astrologers, because
they used no sacrifices, and did not pretend to consult spirits.
Even the derision of his dear friend Nebridius could not then move
him from those absurd speculations.  His friend died, and "his
whole heart was darkened;" "mine eyes would be looking for him in
all places, but they found him not, and I hated all things because
they told me no news of him."  He fell into an extreme weariness of
life, and no less fear of death.  He lived but by halves; having
lost dimidium animae suae, and yet dreaded death, "Lest he might
chance to have wholy dyed whome I extremely loved."  So he returned
to Carthage for change, and sought pleasure in other friendships;
but "Blessed is the man that loves Thee and his friend in Thee and
his enemy for Thee.  For he only never loseth a dear friend to whom
all men are dear, for His sake, who is never lost."

Here, on the margin of the old book, beside these thoughts, so
beautiful if so helpless, like all words, to console, some reader
long dead has written:-


"Pray for your poor servant, J. M."


And again,


"Pray for your poor friend."


Doubtless, some Catholic reader, himself bereaved, is imploring the
prayers of a dear friend dead; and sure we need their petitions
more than they need ours, who have left this world of temptation,
and are at peace.

After this loss Saint Augustine went to Rome, his ambition urging
him, perhaps, but more his disgust with the violent and riotous
life of students in Carthage.  To leave his mother was difficult,
but "I lyed to my mother, yea, such a mother, and so escaped from
her."  And now he had a dangerous sickness, and afterwards betook
himself to converse with the orthodox, for example at Milan with
Saint Ambrose.  In Milan his mother would willingly have continued
in the African ritual--a Pagan survival--carrying wine and food to
the graves of the dead; but this Saint Ambrose forbade, and she
obeyed him for him "she did extremely affect for the regard of my
spirituall good."

From Milan his friend Alipius preceded him to Rome, and there "was
damnably delighted" with the gladiatorial combats, being "made
drunk with a delight in blood."  Augustine followed him to Rome,
and there lost the girl of his heart, "so that my heart was
wounded, as that the very blood did follow."  The lady had made a
vow of eternal chastity, "having left me with a son by her."  But
he fell to a new love as the old one was departed, and yet the
ancient wound pained him still "after a more desperate and dogged
manner."

Haeret letalis arundo!

By these passions his conversion was delayed, the carnal and
spiritual wills fighting against each other within him.  "Give me
chastity and continency, O Lord," he would pray, "but do not give
it yet," and perhaps this is the frankest of the confessions of
Saint Augustine.  In the midst of this war of the spirit and the
flesh, "Behold I heard a voyce, as if it had been of some boy or
girl from some house not farre off, uttering and often repeating
these words in a kind of singing voice,


"Tolle, Lege; Tolle, Lege,
Take up and read, take up and read."


So he took up a Testament, and, opening it at random, after the
manner of his Virgilian lots, read:-

"Not in surfeiting and wantonness, not in causality and
uncleanness," with what follows.  "Neither would I read any
further, neither was there any cause why I should."  Saint
Augustine does not, perhaps, mean us to understand (as his
translator does), that he was "miraculously called."  He knew what
was right perfectly well before; the text only clinched a resolve
which he has found it very hard to make.  Perhaps there was a
trifle of superstition in the matter.  We never know how
superstitious we are.  At all events, henceforth "I neither desired
a wife, nor had I any ambitious care of any worldly thing."  He
told his mother, and Monica rejoiced, believing that now her
prayers were answered.

Such is the story of the conversion of Saint Augustine.  It was the
maturing of an old purpose, and long deferred.  Much stranger
stories are told of Bunyan and Colonel Gardiner.  He gave up
rhetoric; another man was engaged "to sell words" to the students
of Milan.  Being now converted, the Saint becomes less interesting,
except for his account of his mother's death, and of that ecstatic
converse they held "she and I alone, leaning against a window,
which had a prospect upon the garden of our lodging at Ostia."
They


"Came on that which is, and heard
The vast pulsations of the world."


"And whilest we thus spake, and panted towards the divine, we grew
able to take a little taste thereof, with the whole strife of our
hearts, and we sighed profoundly, and left there, confined, the
very top and flower of our souls and spirits; and we returned to
the noyse of language again, where words are begun and ended."

Then Monica fell sick to death, and though she had ever wished to
lie beside her husband in Africa, she said:  "Lay this Body where
you will.  Let not any care of it disquiet you; only this I
entreat, that you will remember me at the altar of the Lord,
wheresoever you be."  "But upon the ninth day of her sickness, in
the six-and-fiftieth year of her age, and the three-and-thirtieth
of mine, that religious and pious soul was discharged from the
prison of her body."

The grief of Augustine was not less keen, it seems, than it had
been at the death of his friend.  But he could remember how "she
related with great dearness of affection, how she never heard any
harsh or unkind word to be darted out of my mouth against her."
And to this consolation was added who knows what of confidence and
tenderness of certain hope, or a kind of deadness, perhaps, that
may lighten the pain of a heart very often tried and inured to
every pain.  For it is certain that "this green wound" was green
and grievous for a briefer time than the agony of his earlier
sorrows.  He himself, so earnest in analysing his own emotions, is
perplexed by the short date of his tears, and his sharpest grief:
"Let him read it who will, and interpret it as it pleaseth him."

So, with the death of Monica, we may leave Saint Augustine.  The
most human of books, the "Confessions," now strays into theology.
Of all books that which it most oddly resembles, to my fancy at
least, is the poems of Catullus.  The passion and the tender heart
they have in common, and in common the war of flesh and spirit; the
shameful inappeasable love of Lesbia, or of the worldly life; so
delightful and dear to the poet and to the saint, so despised in
other moods conquered and victorious again, among the battles of
the war in our members.  The very words in which the Veronese and
the Bishop of Hippo described the pleasure and gaiety of an early
friendship are almost the same, and we feel that, born four hundred
years later, the lover of Lesbia, the singer of Sirmio might
actually have found peace in religion, and exchanged the earthly
for the heavenly love.



CHAPTER IX:  SMOLLETT



The great English novelists of the eighteenth century turned the
course of English Literature out of its older channel.  Her streams
had descended from the double peaks of Parnassus to irrigate the
enamelled fields and elegant parterres of poetry and the drama, as
the critics of the period might have said.  But Richardson,
Fielding, Smollett, and Sterne, diverted the waters, from poetry
and plays, into the region of the novel, whither they have brought
down a copious alluvial deposit.  Modern authors do little but till
this fertile Delta:  the drama is now in the desert, poetry is a
drug, and fiction is literature.  Among the writers who made this
revolution, Smollett is, personally, the least well known to the
world, despite the great part which autobiography and confessions
play in his work.  He is always talking about himself, and
introducing his own experiences.  But there is little evidence from
without; his extant correspondence is scanty; he was not in Dr.
Johnson's circle, much less was he in that of Horace Walpole.  He
was not a popular man, and probably he has long ceased to be a
popular author.  About 1780 the vendors of children's books issued
abridgments of "Tom Jones" and "Pamela," "Clarissa" and "Joseph
Andrews," adapted to the needs of infant minds.  It was a curious
enterprise, certainly, but the booksellers do not seem to have
produced "Every Boy's Roderick Random," or "Peregrine Pickle for
the Young."  Smollett, in short, is less known than Fielding and
Sterne, even Thackeray says but a word about him, in the "English
Humorists," and he has no place in the series of "English Men of
Letters."

What we know of Smollett reveals a thoroughly typical Scot of his
period; a Scot of the species absolutely opposed to Sir Pertinax
Macsycophant, and rather akin to the species of Robert Burns.
"Rather akin," we may say, for Smollett, like Burns, was a
humorist, and in his humour far from dainty; he was a personal
satirist, and a satirist far from chivalrous.  Like Burns, too, he
was a poet of independence; like Burns, and even more than Burns,
in a time of patronage he was recalcitrant against patrons.  But,
unlike Burns, he was farouche to an extreme degree; and, unlike
Burns, he carried very far his prejudices about his "gentrice," his
gentle birth.  Herein he is at the opposite pole from the great
peasant poet.

Two potent characteristics of his country were at war within him.
There was, first, the belief in "gentrice," in a natural difference
of kind between men of coat armour and men without it.  Thus
Roderick Random, the starving cadet of a line of small lairds,
accepts the almost incredible self-denial and devotion of Strap as
merely his due.  Prince Charles could not have taken the devotion
of Henry Goring, or of Neil MacEachain, more entirely as a matter
of course, involving no consideration in return, than Roderick took
the unparalleled self-sacrifice of his barber friend and school-
mate.  Scott has remarked on this contemptuous and ungrateful
selfishness, and has contrasted it with the relations of Tom Jones
and Partridge.  Of course, it is not to be assumed that Smollett
would have behaved like Roderick, when, "finding the fire in my
apartment almost extinguished, I vented my fury upon poor Strap,
whose ear I pinched with such violence that he roared hideously
with pain . . . "  To be sure Roderick presently "felt unspeakable
remorse . . . foamed at the mouth, and kicked the chairs about the
room."  Now Strap had rescued Roderick from starvation, had
bestowed on him hundreds of pounds, and had carried his baggage,
and dined on his leavings.  But Strap was not gently born!
Smollett would not, probably, have acted thus, but he did not
consider such conduct a thing out of nature.

On the other side was Smollett's Scottish spirit of independence.
As early as 1515, James Ingles, chaplain of Margaret Tudor, wrote
to Adam Williamson, "You know the use of this country. . . . The
man hath more words than the master, and will not be content except
he know the master's counsel.  There is no order among us."  Strap
had the instinct of feudal loyalty to a descendant of a laird.  But
Smollett boasts that, being at the time about twenty, and having
burdened a nobleman with his impossible play, "The Regicide,"
"resolved to punish his barbarous indifference, and actually
discarded my Patron."  HE was not given to "booing" (in the sense
of bowing), but had, of all known Scots, the most "canty conceit o'
himsel'."  These qualities, with a violence of temper which took
the form of beating people when on his travels, cannot have made
Smollett a popular character.  He knew his faults, as he shows in
the dedication of "Ferdinand, Count Fathom," to himself.  "I have
known you trifling, superficial, and obstinate in dispute; meanly
jealous and awkwardly reserved; rash and haughty in your
resentment; and coarse and lowly in your connections."

He could, it is true, on occasion, forgive (even where he had not
been wronged), and could compensate, in milder moods, for the
fierce attacks made in hours when he was "meanly jealous."  Yet, in
early life at least, he regarded his own Roderick Random as "modest
and meritorious," struggling nobly with the difficulties which
beset a "friendless orphan," especially from the "selfishness,
envy, malice, and base indifference of mankind."  Roderick himself
is, in fact, the incarnation of the basest selfishness.  In one of
his adventures he is guilty of that extreme infamy which the
d'Artagnan of "The Three Musketeers" and of the "Memoirs"
committed, and for which the d'Artagnan of Le Vicomte de Bragelonne
took shame to himself.  While engaged in a virtuous passion,
Roderick not only behaves like a vulgar debauchee, but pursues the
meanest arts of the fortune-hunter who is ready to marry any woman
for her money.  Such is the modest and meritorious orphan, and
mankind now carries its "base indifference" so far, that Smollett's
biographer, Mr. Hannay, says, "if Roderick had been hanged, I, for
my part, should have heard the tidings unmoved . . . Smollett
obviously died without realising how nearly the hero, who was in
some sort a portrait of himself, came to being a ruffian."

Dr. Carlyle, in 1758, being in London, found Smollett "much of a
humorist, and not to be put out of his way."  A "humorist," here,
means an overbearingly eccentric person, such as Smollett, who
lived much in a society of literary dependants, was apt to become.
But Dr. Carlyle also found that, though Smollett "described so well
the characters of ruffians and profligates," he did not resemble
them.  Dr. Robertson, the historian, "expressed great surprise at
his polished and agreeable manners, and the great urbanity of his
conversation."  He was handsome in person, as his portrait shows,
but his "nervous system was exceedingly irritable and subject to
passion," as he says in the Latin account of his health which, in
1763, he drew up for the physician at Montpellier.  Though, when he
chose, he could behave like a man of breeding, and though he
undeniably had a warm heart for his wife and daughter, he did not
always choose to behave well.  Except Dr. Moore, his biographer, he
seems to have had few real friends during most of his career.

As to persons whom he chose to regard as his enemies, he was beyond
measure rancorous and dangerous.  From his first patron, Lord
Lyttelton, to his last, he pursued them with unscrupulous
animosity.  If he did not mean actually to draw portraits of his
grandfather, his cousins, his school-master, and the apothecary
whose gallipots he attended--in "Roderick Random,"--yet he left the
originals who suggested his characters in a very awkward situation.
For assuredly he did entertain a spite against his grandfather:
and as many of the incidents in "Roderick Random" were
autobiographical, the public readily inferred that others were
founded on fact

The outlines of Smollett's career are familiar, though gaps in our
knowledge occur.  Perhaps they may partly be filled up by the aid
of passages in his novels, plays, and poems:  in these, at all
events, he describes conditions and situations through which he
himself may, or must, have passed.

Born in 1721, he was a younger son of Archibald, a younger son of
Sir James Smollett of Bonhill, a house on the now polluted Leven,
between Loch Lomond and the estuary of the Clyde.  Smollett's
father made an imprudent marriage:  the grandfather provided a
small, but competent provision for him and his family, during his
own life.  The father, Archibald, died; the grandfather left
nothing to the mother of Tobias and her children, but they were
assisted with scrimp decency by the heirs.  Hence the attacks on
the grandfather and cousins of Roderick Random:  but, later,
Smollett returned to kinder feelings.

In some ways Tobias resembled his old grandsire.  About 1710 that
gentleman wrote a Memoir of his own life.  Hence we learn that HE,
in childhood, like Roderick Random, was regarded as "a clog and
burden," and was neglected by his father, ill-used by his step-
mother.  Thus Tobias had not only his own early poverty to resent,
but had a hereditary grudge against fortune, and "the base
indifference of mankind."  The old gentleman was lodged "with very
hard and penurious people," at Glasgow University.  He rose in the
world, and was a good Presbyterian Whig, but "had no liberty" to
help to forfeit James II.  "The puir child, his son" (James III.
and VIII.), "if he was really such, was innocent, and it were hard
to do anything that would touch the son for the father's fault."
The old gentleman, therefore, though a Member of Parliament, evaded
attending the first Parliament after the Union:  "I had no freedom
to do it, because I understood that the great business to be
agitated therein was to make laws for abjuring the Pretender . . .
which I could not go in with, being always of opinion that it was
hard to impose oaths on people who had not freedom to take them."

This was uncommonly liberal conduct, in a Whig, and our Smollett,
though no Jacobite, was in distinct and courageous sympathy with
Jacobite Scotland.  Indeed, he was as patriotic as Burns, or as his
own Lismahago.  These were times, we must remember, in which
Scottish patriotism was more than a mere historical sentiment.
Scotland was inconceivably poor, and Scots, in England, were
therefore ridiculous.  The country had, so far, gained very little
by the Union, and the Union was detested even by Scottish Whig
Earls.  It is recorded by Moore that, while at the Dumbarton
Grammar School, Smollett wrote "verses to the memory of Wallace, of
whom he became an early admirer," having read "Blind Harry's
translation of the Latin poems of John Blair," chaplain to that
hero.  There probably never were any such Latin poems, but Smollett
began with the same hero-worship as Burns.  He had the attachment
of a Scot to his native stream, the Leven, which later he was to
celebrate.  Now if Smollett had credited Roderick Random with these
rural, poetical, and patriotic tastes, his hero would have been
much more human and amiable.  There was much good in Smollett which
is absent in Random.  But for some reason, probably because
Scotland was unpopular after the Forty-Five, Smollett merely
describes the woes, ill usage, and retaliations of Roderick.  That
he suffered as Random did is to the last degree improbable.  He had
a fair knowledge of Latin, and was not destitute of Greek, while
his master, a Mr. Love, bore a good character both for humanity and
scholarship.  He must have studied the classics at Glasgow
University, where he was apprenticed to Mr. Gordon, a surgeon.
Gordon, again, was an excellent man, appreciated by Smollett
himself in after days, and the odious Potion of "Roderick Random"
must, like his rival, Crab, have been merely a fancy sketch of
meanness, hypocrisy, and profligacy.  Perhaps the good surgeon
became the victim of that "one continued string of epigrammatic
sarcasms," such as Mr. Colquhoun told Ramsay of Ochtertyre,
Smollett used to play off on his companions, "for which no talents
could compensate."  Judging by Dr. Carlyle's Memoirs this
intolerable kind of display was not unusual in Caledonian
conversation:  but it was not likely to make Tobias popular in
England.

Thither he went in 1739, with very little money, "and a very large
assortment of letters of recommendation:  whether his relatives
intended to compensate for the scantiness of the one by their
profusion in the other is uncertain; but he has often been heard to
declare that their liberality in the last article was prodigious."
The Smolletts were not "kinless loons"; they had connections:  but
who, in Scotland, had money?  Tobias had passed his medical
examinations, but he rather trusted in his MS. tragedy, "The
Regicide."  Tragical were its results for the author.  Inspired by
George Buchanan's Latin history of Scotland, Smollett had produced
a play, in blank verse, on the murder of James I.  That a boy, even
a Scottish boy, should have an overweening passion for this unlucky
piece, that he should expect by such a work to climb a step on
fortune's ladder, is nowadays amazing.  For ten years he clung to
it, modified it, polished, improved it, and then published it in
1749, after the success of "Roderick Random."  Twice he told the
story of his theatrical mishaps and disappointments, which were
such as occur to every writer for the stage.  He wailed over them
in "Roderick Random," in the story of Mr. Melopoyn; he prolonged
his cry, in the preface to "The Regicide," and probably the noble
whom he "lashed" (very indecently) in his two satires ("Advice,"
1746, "Reproof," 1747, and in "Roderick Random") was the patron who
could not get the tragedy acted.  First, in 1739, he had a patron
whom he "discarded."  Then he went to the West Indies, and,
returning in 1744, he lugged out his tragedy again, and fell foul
again of patrons, actors, and managers.  What befell him was the
common fate.  People did not, probably, hasten to read his play:
managers and "supercilious peers" postponed that entertainment, or,
at least, the noblemen could not make the managers accept it if
they did not want it.  Our taste differs so much from that of the
time which admired Home's "Douglas," and "The Regicide" was so
often altered to meet objections, that we can scarcely criticise
it.  Of course it is absolutely unhistorical; of course it is empty
of character, and replete with fustian, and ineffably tedious; but
perhaps it is not much worse than other luckier tragedies of the
age.  Naturally a lover calls his wounded lady "the bleeding fair."
Naturally she exclaims -


"Celestial powers
Protect my father, shower upon his--oh!"  (Dies).


Naturally her adorer answers with -


"So may our mingling souls
To bliss supernal wing our happy--oh!"  (Dies).


We are reminded of -


"Alas, my Bom!"  (Dies).
"'Bastes' he would have said!"


The piece, if presented, must have been damned.  But Smollett was
so angry with one patron, Lord Lyttelton, that he burlesqued the
poor man's dirge on the death of his wife.  He was so angry with
Garrick that he dragged him into "Roderick Random" as Marmozet.
Later, obliged by Garrick, and forgiving Lyttelton, he wrote
respectfully about both.  But, in 1746 (in "Advice"), he had
assailed the "proud lord, who smiles a gracious lie," and "the
varnished ruffians of the State."  Because Tobias's play was
unacted, people who tried to aid him were liars and ruffians, and a
great deal worse, for in his satire, as in his first novel,
Smollett charges men of high rank with the worst of unnamable
crimes.  Pollio and Lord Strutwell, whoever they may have been,
were probably recognisable then, and were undeniably libelled,
though they did not appeal to a jury.  It is improbable that Sir
John Cope had ever tried to oblige Smollett.  His ignoble attack on
Cope, after that unfortunate General had been fairly and honourably
acquitted of incompetence and cowardice, was, then, wholly
disinterested.  Cope is "a courtier Ape, appointed General."


"Then Pug, aghast, fled faster than the wind,
Nor deign'd, in three-score miles, to look behind;
While every band for orders bleat in vain,
And fall in slaughtered heaps upon the plain," -


of Preston Pans.

Nothing could be more remote from the truth, or more unjustly
cruel.  Smollett had not here even the excuse of patriotism.  Sir
John Cope was no Butcher Cumberland.  In fact the poet's friend is
not wrong, when, in "Reproof," he calls Smollett "a flagrant
misanthrope."  The world was out of joint for the cadet of Bonhill:
both before and after his very trying experiences as a ship surgeon
the managers would not accept "The Regicide."  This was reason good
why Smollett should try to make a little money and notoriety by
penning satires.  They are fierce, foul-mouthed, and pointless.
But Smollett was poor, and he was angry; he had the examples of
Pope and Swift before him; which, as far as truculence went, he
could imitate.  Above all, it was then the fixed belief of men of
letters that some peer or other ought to aid and support them; and,
as no peer did support Smollett, obviously they were "varnished
ruffians."  He erred as he would not err now, for times, and ways
of going wrong, are changed.  But, at best, how different are his
angry couplets from the lofty melancholy of Johnson's satires!

Smollett's "small sum of money" did not permit him long to push the
fortunes of his tragedy, in 1739; and as for his "very large
assortment of letters of recommendation," they only procured for
him the post of surgeon's mate in the Cumberland of the line.  Here
he saw enough of the horrors of naval life, enough of misery,
brutality, and mismanagement, at Carthagena (1741), to supply
materials for the salutary and sickening pages on that theme in
"Roderick Random."  He also saw and appreciated the sterling
qualities of courage, simplicity, and generosity, which he has made
immortal in his Bowlings and Trunnions.

It is part of a novelist's business to make one half of the world
know how the other half lives; and in this province Smollett
anticipated Dickens.  He left the service as soon as he could, when
the beaten fleet was refitting at Jamaica.  In that isle he seems
to have practised as a doctor; and he married, or was betrothed to,
a Miss Lascelles, who had a small and far from valuable property.
The real date of his marriage is obscure:  more obscure are
Smollett's resources on his return to London, in 1744.  Houses in
Downing Street can never have been cheap, but we find "Mr.
Smollett, surgeon in Downing Street, Westminster," and, in 1746, he
was living in May Fair, not a region for slender purses.  His
tragedy was now bringing in nothing but trouble, to himself and
others.  His satires cannot have been lucrative.  As a dweller in
May Fair he could not support himself, like his Mr. Melopoyn, by
writing ballads for street singers.  Probably he practised in his
profession.  In "Count Fathom" he makes his adventurer "purchase an
old chariot, which was new painted for the occasion, and likewise
hire a footman . . . This equipage, though much more expensive than
his finances could bear, he found absolutely necessary to give him
a chance of employment . . . A walking physician was considered as
an obscure pedlar."  A chariot, Smollett insists, was necessary to
"every raw surgeon"; while Bob Sawyer's expedient of "being called
from church" was already vieux jeu, in the way of advertisement.
Such things had been "injudiciously hackneyed."  In this passage of
Fathom's adventures, Smollett proclaims his insight into methods of
getting practice.  A physician must ingratiate himself with
apothecaries and ladies' maids, or "acquire interest enough" to
have an infirmary erected "by the voluntary subscriptions of his
friends."  Here Smollett denounces hospitals, which "encourage the
vulgar to be idle and dissolute, by opening an asylum to them and
their families, from the diseases of poverty and intemperance."
This is odd morality for one who suffered from "the base
indifference of mankind."  He ought to have known that poverty is
not a vice for which the poor are to be blamed; and that
intemperance is not the only other cause of their diseases.
Perhaps the unfeeling passage is a mere paradox in the style of his
own Lismahago.

With or without a chariot, it is probable that Tobias had not an
insinuating style, or "a good bedside manner"; friends to support a
hospital for his renown he had none; but, somehow, he could live in
May Fair, and, in 1746, could meet Dr. Carlyle and Stewart, son of
the Provost of Edinburgh, and other Scots, at the Golden Ball in
Cockspur Street.  There they were enjoying "a frugal supper and a
little punch," when the news of Culloden arrived.  Carlyle had been
a Whig volunteer:  he, probably, was happy enough; but Stewart,
whose father was in prison, grew pale, and left the room.  Smollett
and Carlyle then walked home through secluded streets, and were
silent, lest their speech should bewray them for Scots.  "John
Bull," quoth Smollett, "is as haughty and valiant to-day, as he was
abject and cowardly on the Black Wednesday when the Highlanders
were at Derby."

"Weep, Caledonia, weep!" he had written in his tragedy.  Now he
wrote "Mourn, hapless Caledonia, mourn."  Scott has quoted, from
Graham of Gartmore, the story of Smollett's writing verses, while
Gartmore and others were playing cards.  He read them what he had
written, "The Tears of Scotland," and added the last verse on the
spot, when warned that his opinions might give offence.


"Yes, spite of thine insulting foe,
My sympathising verse shall flow."


The "Tears" are better than the "Ode to Blue-Eyed Ann," probably
Mrs. Smollett.  But the courageous author of "The Tears of
Scotland," had manifestly broken with patrons.  He also broke with
Rich, the manager at Covent Garden, for whom he had written an
opera libretto.  He had failed as doctor, and as dramatist; nor, as
satirist, had he succeeded.  Yet he managed to wear wig and sword,
and to be seen in good men's company.  Perhaps his wife's little
fortune supported him, till, in 1748, he produced "Roderick
Random."  It is certain that we never find Smollett in the deep
distresses of Dr. Johnson and Goldsmith.  Novels were now in vogue;
"Pamela" was recent, "Joseph Andrews" was yet more recent,
"Clarissa Harlowe" had just appeared, and Fielding was publishing
"Tom Jones."  Smollett, too, tried his hand, and, at last, he
succeeded.

His ideas of the novel are offered in his preface.  The Novel, for
him, is a department of Satire; "the most entertaining and
universally improving."  To Smollett, "Roderick Random" seemed an
"improving" work!  Ou le didacticisme va t'il se nicher?  Romance,
he declares, "arose in ignorance, vanity, and superstition," and
declined into "the ludicrous and unnatural."  Then Cervantes
"converted romance to purposes far more useful and entertaining, by
making it assume the sock, and point out the follies of ordinary
life."  Romance was to revive again some twenty years after its
funeral oration was thus delivered.  As for Smollett himself, he
professedly "follows the plan" of Le Sage, in "Gil Blas" (a plan as
old as Petronius Arbiter, and the "Golden Ass" of Apuleius); but he
gives more place to "compassion," so as not to interfere with
"generous indignation, which ought to animate the reader against
the sordid and vicious disposition of the world."  As a contrast to
sordid vice, we are to admire "modest merit" in that exemplary
orphan, Mr. Random.  This gentleman is a North Briton, because only
in North Britain can a poor orphan get such an education as
Roderick's "birth and character require," and for other reasons.
Now, as for Roderick, the schoolmaster "gave himself no concern
about the progress I made," but, "should endeavour, with God's
help, to prevent my future improvement."  It must have been at
Glasgow University, then, that Roderick learned "Greek very well,
and was pretty far advanced in the mathematics," and here he must
have used his genius for the belles lettres, in the interest of his
"amorous complexion," by "lampooning the rivals" of the young
ladies who admired him.

Such are the happy beginnings, accompanied by practical jokes, of
this interesting model.  Smollett's heroes, one conceives, were
intended to be fine, though not faultless young fellows; men, not
plaster images; brave, generous, free-living, but, as Roderick
finds once, when examining his conscience, pure from serious stains
on that important faculty.  To us these heroes often appear no
better than ruffians; Peregrine Pickle, for example, rather excels
the infamy of Ferdinand, Count Fathom, in certain respects; though
Ferdinand is professedly "often the object of our detestation and
abhorrence," and is left in a very bad, but, as "Humphrey Clinker"
shows, in by no means a hopeless way.  Yet, throughout, Smollett
regarded himself as a moralist, a writer of improving tendencies;
one who "lashed the vices of the age."  He was by no means wholly
mistaken, but we should probably wrong the eighteenth century if we
accepted all Smollett's censures as entirely deserved.  The vices
which he lashed are those which he detected, or fancied that he
detected, in people who regarded a modest and meritorious Scottish
orphan with base indifference.  Unluckily the greater part of
mankind was guilty of this crime, and consequently was capable of
everything.

Enough has probably been said about the utterly distasteful figure
of Smollett's hero.  In Chapter LX. we find him living on the
resources of Strap, then losing all Strap's money at play, and then
"I bilk my taylor."  That is, Roderick orders several suits of new
clothes, and sells them for what they will fetch.  Meanwhile Strap
can live honestly anywhere, while he has his ten fingers.  Roderick
rescues himself from poverty by engaging, with his uncle, in the
slave trade.  We are apt to consider this commerce infamous.  But,
in 1763, the Evangelical director who helped to make Cowper "a
castaway," wrote, as to the slaver's profession:  "It is, indeed,
accounted a genteel employment, and is usually very profitable,
though to me it did not prove so, the Lord seeing that a large
increase of wealth could not be good for me."  The reverend
gentleman had, doubtless, often sung -


"Time for us to go,
Time for us to go,
And when we'd got the hatches down,
'Twas time for us to go!"


Roderick, apart from "black ivory," is aided by his uncle and his
long lost father.  The base world, in the persons of Strap,
Thompson, the uncle, Mr. Sagely, and other people, treats him
infinitely better than he deserves.  His very love (as always in
Smollett) is only an animal appetite, vigorously insisted upon by
the author.  By a natural reaction, Scott, much as he admired
Smollett, introduced his own blameless heroes, and even Thackeray
could only hint at the defects of youth, in "Esmond."  Thackeray is
accused of making his good people stupid, or too simple, or
eccentric, and otherwise contemptible.  Smollett went further:
Strap, a model of benevolence, is ludicrous and a coward; even
Bowling has the stage eccentricities of the sailor.  Mankind was
certain, in the long run, to demand heroes more amiable and worthy
of respect.  Our inclinations, as Scott says, are with "the open-
hearted, good-humoured, and noble-minded Tom Jones, whose
libertinism (one particular omitted) is perhaps rendered but too
amiable by his good qualities."  To be sure Roderick does befriend
"a reclaimed street-walker" in her worst need, but why make her the
confidante of the virginal Narcissa?  Why reward Strap with her
hand?  Fielding decidedly, as Scott insists, "places before us
heroes, and especially heroines, of a much higher as well as more
pleasing character, than Smollett was able to present."

"But the deep and fertile genius of Smollett afforded resources
sufficient to make up for these deficiencies . . . If Fielding had
superior taste, the palm of more brilliancy of genius, more
inexhaustible richness of invention, must in justice be awarded to
Smollett.  In comparison with his sphere, that in which Fielding
walked was limited . . . " The second part of Scott's parallel
between the men whom he considered the greatest of our novelists,
qualifies the first.  Smollett's invention was not richer than
Fielding's, but the sphere in which he walked, the circle of his
experience, was much wider.  One division of life they knew about
equally well, the category of rakes, adventurers, card-sharpers,
unhappy authors, people of the stage, and ladies without
reputations, in every degree.  There were conditions of higher
society, of English rural society, and of clerical society, which
Fielding, by birth and education, knew much better than Smollett.
But Smollett had the advantage of his early years in Scotland, then
as little known as Japan; with the "nautical multitude," from
captain to loblolly boy, he was intimately familiar; with the West
Indies he was acquainted; and he later resided in Paris, and
travelled in Flanders, so that he had more experience, certainly,
if not more invention, than Fielding.

In "Roderick Random" he used Scottish "local colour" very little,
but his life had furnished him with a surprising wealth of "strange
experiences."  Inns were, we must believe, the favourite home of
adventures, and Smollett could ring endless changes on mistakes
about bedrooms.  None of them is so innocently diverting as the
affair of Mr. Pickwick and the lady in yellow curl-papers; but the
absence of that innocence which heightens Mr. Pickwick's distresses
was welcome to admirers of what Lady Mary Wortley Montagu calls
"gay reading."

She wrote from abroad, in 1752, "There is something humorous in R.
Random, that makes me believe that the author is H. Fielding"--her
kinsman.  Her ladyship did her cousin little justice.  She did not
complain of the morals of "R. Random," but thought "Pamela" and
"Clarissa" "likely to do more general mischief than the works of
Lord Rochester."  Probably "R. Random" did little harm.  His career
is too obviously ideal.  Too many ups and downs occur to him, and
few orphans of merit could set before themselves the ideal of
bilking their tailors, gambling by way of a profession, dealing in
the slave trade, and wheedling heiresses.

The variety of character in the book is vast; in Morgan we have an
excellent, fiery, Welshman, of the stage type; the different minor
miscreants are all vividly designed; the eccentric lady author may
have had a real original; Miss Snapper has much vivacity as a wit;
the French adventures in the army are, in their rude barbaric way,
a forecast of Barry Lyndon's; and, generally, both Scott and
Thackeray owe a good deal to Smollett in the way of suggestions.
Smollett's extraordinary love of dilating on noisome smells and
noisome sights, that intense affection for the physically nauseous,
which he shared with Swift, is rather less marked in "Roderick"
than in "Humphrey Clinker," and "The Adventures of an Atom."  The
scenes in the Marshalsea must have been familiar to Dickens.  The
terrible history of Miss Williams is Hogarth's Harlot's Progress
done into unsparing prose.  Smollett guides us at a brisk pace
through the shady and brutal side of the eighteenth century; his
vivacity is as unflagging as that of his disagreeable rattle of a
hero.  The passion usually understood as love is, to be sure, one
of which he seems to have no conception; he regards a woman much as
a greedy person might regard a sirloin of beef, or, at least, a
plate of ortolans.  At her marriage a bride is "dished up;" that is
all.

Thus this "gay writing" no longer makes us gay.  In reading
"Peregrine Pickle" and "Humphrey Clinker," a man may find himself
laughing aloud, but hardly in reading "Roderick Random."  The fun
is of the cruel primitive sort, arising merely from the
contemplation of somebody's painful discomfiture.  Bowling and
Rattlin may be regarded with affectionate respect; but Roderick has
only physical courage and vivacity to recommend him.  Whether
Smollett, in Flaubert's deliberate way, purposely abstained from
moralising on the many scenes of physical distress which he
painted; or whether he merely regarded them without emotion, has
been debated.  It seems more probable that he thought they carried
their own moral.  It is the most sympathetic touch in Roderick's
character, that he writes thus of his miserable crew of slaves:
"Our ship being freed from the disagreeable lading of negroes, TO
WHOM INDEED I HAD BEEN A MISERABLE SLAVE SINCE OUR LEAVING THE
COAST OF GUINEA, I began to enjoy myself."  Smollett was a
physician, and had the pitifulness of his profession; though we see
how casually he makes Random touch on his own unwonted benevolence.

People had not begun to know the extent of their own brutality in
the slave trade, but Smollett probably did know it.  If a curious
prophetic letter attributed to him, and published more than twenty
years after his death, be genuine; he had the strongest opinions
about this form of commercial enterprise.  But he did not wear his
heart on his sleeve, where he wore his irritable nervous system.
It is probable enough that he felt for the victims of poverty,
neglect, and oppression (despite his remarks on hospitals) as
keenly as Dickens.  We might regard his offensively ungrateful
Roderick as a purely dramatic exhibition of a young man, if his
other heroes were not as bad, or worse; if their few redeeming
qualities were not stuck on in patches; and if he had omitted his
remark about Roderick's "modest merit."  On the other hand, the
good side of Matthew Bramble seems to be drawn from Smollett's own
character, and, if that be the case, he can have had little
sympathy with his own humorous Barry Lyndons.  Scott and Thackeray
leaned to the favourable view:  Smollett, his nervous system apart,
was manly and kindly.

As regards plot, "Roderick Random" is a mere string of picturesque
adventures.  It is at the opposite pole from "Tom Jones" in the
matter of construction.  There is no reason why it should ever stop
except the convenience of printers and binders.  Perhaps we lay too
much stress on the somewhat mechanical art of plot-building.
Fielding was then setting the first and best English example of a
craft in which the very greatest authors have been weak, or of
which they were careless.  Smollett was always rather more
incapable, or rather more indifferent, in plot-weaving, than
greater men.

In our day of royalties, and gossip about the gains of authors, it
would be interesting to know what manner and size of a cheque
Smollett received from his publisher, the celebrated Mr. Osborne.
We do not know, but Smollett published his next novel "on
commission," "printed for the Author"; so probably he was not well
satisfied with the pecuniary result of "Roderick Random."  Thereby,
says Dr. Moore, he "acquired much more reputation than money."  So
he now published "The Regicide" "by subscription, that method of
publication being then more reputable than it has been thought
since" (1797).  Of "The Regicide," and its unlucky preface, enough,
or more, has been said.  The public sided with the managers, not
with the meritorious orphan.

For the sake of pleasure, or of new experiences, or of economy,
Smollett went to Paris in 1750, where he met Dr. Moore, later his
biographer, the poetical Dr. Akenside, and an affected painter.  He
introduced the poet and painter into "Peregrine Pickle"; and makes
slight use of a group of exiled Jacobites, including Mr. Hunter of
Burnside.  In 1750, there were Jacobites enough in the French
capital, all wondering very much where Prince Charles might be, and
quite unconscious that he was their neighbour in a convent in the
Rue St. Dominique.  Though Moore does not say so (he is provokingly
economical of detail), we may presume that Smollett went wandering
in Flanders, as does Peregrine Pickle.  It is curious that he
should introduce a Capucin, a Jew, and a black-eyed damsel, all in
the Ghent diligence, when we know that Prince Charles did live in
Ghent, with the black-eyed Miss Walkenshaw, did go about disguised
as a Capucin, and was tracked by a Jewish spy, while the other spy,
Young Glengarry, styled himself "Pickle."  But all those events
occurred about a year after the novel was published in 1751.

Before that date Smollett had got an M.D. degree from Aberdeen
University, and, after returning from France, he practised for a
year or two at Bath.  But he could not expect to be successful
among fashionable invalids, and, in "Humphrey Clinker," he make
Matthew Bramble give such an account of the Bath waters as M. Zola
might envy.  He was still trying to gain ground in his profession,
when, in March 1751, Mr. D. Wilson published the first edition of
"Peregrine Pickle" "for the Author," unnamed.  I have never seen
this first edition, which was "very curious and disgusting."
Smollett, in his preface to the second edition, talks of "the art
and industry that were used to stifle him in the birth, by certain
booksellers and others."  He now "reformed the manners, and
corrected the expressions," removed or modified some passages of
personal satire, and held himself exempt from "the numerous shafts
of envy, rancour, and revenge, that have lately, both in private
and public, been levelled at his reputation."  Who were these base
and pitiless dastards?  Probably every one who did not write
favourably about the book.  Perhaps Smollett suspected Fielding,
whom he attacks in several parts of his works, treating him as a
kind of Jonathan Wild, a thief-taker, and an associate with
thieves.  Why Smollett thus misconducted himself is a problem,
unless he was either "meanly jealous," or had taken offence at some
remarks in Fielding's newspaper.  Smollett certainly began the war,
in the first edition of "Peregrine Pickle."  He made a kind of
palinode to the "trading justice" later, as other people of his
kind have done.

A point in "Peregrine Pickle" easily assailed was the long episode
about a Lady of Quality:  the beautiful Lady Vane, whose memoirs
Smollett introduced into his tale.  Horace Walpole found that she
had omitted the only feature in her career of which she had just
reason to be proud:  the number of her lovers.  Nobody doubted that
Smollett was paid for casting his mantle over Lady Vane:  moreover,
he might expect a success of scandal.  The roman a clef is always
popular with scandal-mongers, but its authors can hardly hope to
escape rebuke.

It was not till 1752 that Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, in Italy,
received "Peregrine," with other fashionable romances--"Pompey the
Little," "The Parish Girl," "Eleanora's Adventures," "The Life of
Mrs. Theresa Constantia Phipps," "The Adventures of Mrs. Loveil,"
and so on.  Most of them contained portraits of real people, and,
no doubt, most of them were therefore successful.  But where are
they now?  Lady Mary thought Lady Vane's part of "Peregrine" "more
instructive to young women than any sermon that I know."  She
regarded Fielding as with Congreve, the only "original" of her age,
but Fielding had to write for bread, and that is "the most
contemptible way of getting bread."  She did not, at this time,
even know Smollett's name, but she admired him, and, later, calls
him "my dear Smollett."  This lady thought that Fielding did not
know what sorry fellows his Tom Jones and Captain Booth were.  Not
near so sorry as Peregine Pickle were they, for this gentleman is a
far more atrocious ruffian than Roderick Random.

None the less "Peregrine" is Smollett's greatest work.  Nothing is
so rich in variety of character, scene, and adventure.  We are
carried along by the swift and copious volume of the current,
carried into very queer places, and into the oddest miscellaneous
company, but we cannot escape from Smollett's vigorous grasp.  Sir
Walter thought that "Roderick" excelled its successor in "ease and
simplicity," and that Smollett's sailors, in "Pickle," "border on
caricature."  No doubt they do:  the eccentricities of Hawser
Trunnion, Esq., are exaggerated, and Pipes is less subdued than
Rattlin, though always delightful.  But Trunnion absolutely makes
one laugh out aloud:  whether he is criticising the sister of Mr.
Gamaliel Pickle in that gentleman's presence, at a pot-house; or
riding to the altar with his squadron of sailors, tacking in an
unfavourable gale; or being run away into a pack of hounds, and
clearing a hollow road over a waggoner, who views him with
"unspeakable terror and amazement."  Mr. Winkle as an equestrian is
not more entirely acceptable to the mind than Trunnion.  We may
speak of "caricature," but if an author can make us sob with
laughter, to criticise him solemnly is ungrateful.

Except Fielding occasionally, and Smollett, and Swift, and
Sheridan, and the authors of "The Rovers," one does not remember
any writers of the eighteenth century who quite upset the gravity
of the reader.  The scene of the pedant's dinner after the manner
of the ancients, does not seem to myself so comic as the adventures
of Trunnion, while the bride is at the altar, and the bridegroom is
tacking and veering with his convoy about the fields.  One sees how
the dinner is done:  with a knowledge of Athenaeus, Juvenal,
Petronius, and Horace, many men could have written this set piece.
But Trunnion is quite inimitable:  he is a child of humour and of
the highest spirits, like Mr. Weller the elder.  Till Scott created
Mause Headrig, no Caledonian had ever produced anything except "Tam
o' Shanter," that could be a pendant to Trunnion.  His pathos is
possibly just a trifle overdone, though that is not my own opinion.
Dear Trunnion! he makes me overlook the gambols of his detestable
protege, the hero.

That scoundrel is not an impossible caricature of an obstinate,
vain, cruel libertine.  Peregrine was precisely the man to fall in
love with Emilia pour le bon motif, and then attempt to ruin her,
though she was the sister of his friend, by devices worthy of
Lovelace at his last and lowest stage.  Peregrine's overwhelming
vanity, swollen by facile conquests, would inevitably have degraded
him to this abyss.  The intrigue was only the worst of those
infamous practical jokes of his, in which Smollett takes a cruel
and unholy delight.  Peregrine, in fact, is a hero of naturalisme,
except that his fits of generosity are mere patches daubed on, and
that his reformation is a farce, in which a modern naturaliste
would have disdained to indulge.  Emilia, in her scene with
Peregrine in the bouge to which he has carried her, rises much
above Smollett's heroines, and we could like her, if she had never
forgiven behaviour which was beneath pardon.

Peregrine's education at Winchester bears out Lord Elcho's
description of that academy in his lately published Memoirs.  It
was apt to develop Peregrines; and Lord Elcho himself might have
furnished Smollett with suitable adventures.  There can be no doubt
that Cadwallader Crabtree suggested Sir Malachi Malagrowther to
Scott, and that Hatchway and Pipes, taking up their abode with
Peregrine in the Fleet, gave a hint to Dickens for Sam Weller and
Mr. Pickwick in the same abode.  That "Peregrine" "does far excel
'Joseph Andrews' and 'Amelia'," as Scott declares, few modern
readers will admit.  The world could do much better without
"Peregrine" than without "Joseph"; while Amelia herself alone is a
study greatly preferable to the whole works of Smollett:  such, at
least, is the opinion of a declared worshipper of that peerless
lady.  Yet "Peregrine" is a kind of Odyssey of the eighteenth
century:  an epic of humour and of adventure.

In February 1753, Smollett "obliged the town" with his "Adventures
of Ferdinand, Count Fathom," a cosmopolitan swindler and
adventurer.  The book is Smollett's "Barry Lyndon," yet as his hero
does not tell his own story, but is perpetually held up as a
"dreadful example," there is none of Thackeray's irony, none of his
subtlety.  "Here is a really bad man, a foreigner too," Smollett
seems to say, "do not be misled, oh maidens, by the wiles of such a
Count!  Impetuous youth, play not with him at billiards, basset, or
gleek.  Fathers, on such a rogue shut your doors:  collectors,
handle not his nefarious antiques.  Let all avoid the path and shun
the example of Ferdinand, Count Fathom!"

Such is Smollett's sermon, but, after all, Ferdinand is hardly
worse than Roderick or Peregrine.  The son of a terrible old sutler
and camp-follower, a robber and slayer of wounded men, Ferdinand
had to live by his wits, and he was hardly less scrupulous, after
all, than Peregrine and Roderick.  The daubs of casual generosity
were not laid on, and that is all the difference.  As Sophia
Western was mistaken for Miss Jenny Cameron, so Ferdinand was
arrested as Prince Charles, who, in fact, caused much inconvenience
to harmless travellers.  People were often arrested as "The
Pretender's son" abroad as well as in England.

The life and death of Ferdinand's mother, shot by a wounded hussar
in her moment of victory, make perhaps the most original and
interesting part of this hero's adventures.  The rest is much akin
to his earlier novels, but the history of Rinaldo and Monimia has a
passage not quite alien to the vein of Mrs. Radcliffe.  Some
remarks in the first chapter show that Smollett felt the censures
on his brutality and "lowness," and he promises to seek "that goal
of perfection where nature is castigated almost even to still life
. . . where decency, divested of all substance, hovers about like a
fantastic shadow."

Smollett never reached that goal, and even the shadow of decency
never haunted him so as to make him afraid with any amazement.
Smollett avers that he "has had the courage to call in question the
talents of a pseudo-patron," and so is charged with "insolence,
rancour, and scurrility."  Of all these things, and of worse, he
had been guilty; his offence had never been limited to "calling in
question the talents" of persons who had been unsuccessful in
getting his play represented.  Remonstrance merely irritated
Tobias.  His new novel was but a fainter echo of his old novels, a
panorama of scoundrelism, with the melodramatic fortunes of the
virtuous Monimia for a foil.  If read to-day, it is read as a
sketch of manners, or want of manners.  The scene in which the
bumpkin squire rooks the accomplished Fathom at hazard, in Paris,
is prettily conceived, and Smollett's indignation at the British
system of pews in church is edifying.  But when Monimia appears to
her lover as he weeps at her tomb, and proves to be no phantom, but
a "warm and substantial" Monimia, capable of being "dished up,"
like any other Smollettian heroine, the reader is sensibly annoyed.
Tobias as un romantique is absolutely too absurd; "not here, oh
Tobias, are haunts meet for thee."

Smollett's next novel, "Sir Launcelot Greaves," was not published
till 1761, after it had appeared in numbers, in The British
Magazine.  This was a sixpenny serial, published by Newbery.  The
years between 1753 and 1760 had been occupied by Smollett in
quarrelling, getting imprisoned for libel, editing the Critical
Review, writing his "History of England," translating (or adapting
old translations of) "Don Quixote," and driving a team of literary
hacks, whose labours he superintended, and to whom he gave a weekly
dinner.  These exploits are described by Dr. Carlyle, and by
Smollett himself, in "Humphrey Clinker."  He did not treat his
vassals with much courtesy or consideration; but then they expected
no such treatment.  We have no right to talk of his doings as "a
blood-sucking method, literary sweating," like a recent biographer
of Smollett.  Not to speak of the oddly mixed metaphor, we do not
know what Smollett's relations to his retainers really were.  As an
editor he had to see his contributors.  The work of others he may
have recommended, as "reader" to publishers.  Others may have made
transcripts for him, or translations.  That Smollett "sweated" men,
or sucked their blood, or both, seems a crude way of saying that he
found them employment.  Nobody says that Johnson "sweated" the
persons who helped him in compiling his Dictionary; or that Mr.
Jowett "sweated" the friends and pupils who aided him in his
translation of Plato.  Authors have a perfect right to procure
literary assistance, especially in learned books, if they pay for
it, and acknowledge their debt to their allies.  On the second
point, Smollett was probably not in advance of his age.

"Sir Launcelot Greaves" is, according to Chambers, "a sorry
specimen of the genius of the author," and Mr. Oliphant Smeaton
calls it "decidedly the least popular" of his novels, while Scott
astonishes us by preferring it to "Jonathan Wild."  Certainly it is
inferior to "Roderick Random" and to "Peregrine Pickle," but it
cannot be so utterly unreal as "The Adventures of an Atom."  I, for
one, venture to prefer "Sir Launcelot" to "Ferdinand, Count
Fathom."  Smollett was really trying an experiment in the
fantastic.  Just as Mr. Anstey Guthrie transfers the mediaeval myth
of Venus and the Ring, or the Arabian tale of the bottled-up geni
(or djinn) into modern life, so Smollett transferred Don Quixote.
His hero, a young baronet of wealth, and of a benevolent and
generous temper, is crossed in love.  Though not mad, he is
eccentric, and commences knight-errant.  Scott, and others, object
to his armour, and say that, in his ordinary clothes, and with his
well-filled purse, he would have been more successful in righting
wrongs.  Certainly, but then the comic fantasy of the armed knight
arriving at the ale-house, and jangling about the rose-hung lanes
among the astonished folk of town and country, would have been
lost.  Smollett is certainly less unsuccessful in wild fantasy,
than in the ridiculous romantic scenes where the substantial
phantom of Monimia disports itself.  The imitation of the knight by
the nautical Captain Crowe (an excellent Smollettian mariner) is
entertaining, and Sir Launcelot's crusty Sancho is a pleasant
variety in squires.  The various forms of oppression which the
knight resists are of historical interest, as also is the contested
election between a rustic Tory and a smooth Ministerialist:
"sincerely attached to the Protestant succession, in detestation of
a popish, an abjured, and an outlawed Pretender."  The heroine,
Aurelia Darrel, is more of a lady, and less of a luxury, than
perhaps any other of Smollett's women.  But how Smollett makes
love!  "Tea was called.  The lovers were seated; he looked and
languished; she flushed and faltered; all was doubt and delirium,
fondness and flutter."

"All was gas and gaiters," said the insane lover of Mrs. Nickleby,
with equal delicacy and point.

Scott says that Smollett, when on a visit to Scotland, used to
write his chapter of "copy" in the half-hour before the post went
out.  Scott was very capable of having the same thing happen to
himself.  "Sir Launcelot" is hurriedly, but vigorously written:
the fantasy was not understood as Smollett intended it to be, and
the book is blotted, as usual, with loathsome medical details.  But
people in Madame du Deffand's circle used openly to discuss the
same topics, to the confusion of Horace Walpole.  As the hero of
this book is a generous gentleman, as the most of it is kind and
manly, and the humour provocative of an honest laugh, it is by no
means to be despised, while the manners, if caricatured, are based
on fact.

It is curious to note that in "Sir Launcelot Greaves," we find a
character, Ferret, who frankly poses as a strugforlifeur.  M.
Daudet's strugforlifeur had heard of Darwin.  Mr. Ferret had read
Hobbes, learned that man was in a state of nature, and inferred
that we ought to prey upon each other, as a pike eats trout.  Miss
Burney, too, at Bath, about 1780, met a perfectly emancipated young
"New Woman."  She had read Bolingbroke and Hume, believed in
nothing, and was ready to be a "Woman who Did."  Our ancestors
could be just as advanced as we are.

Smollett went on compiling, and supporting himself by his
compilations, and those of his vassals.  In 1762 he unluckily
edited a paper called The Briton in the interests of Lord Bute.
The Briton was silenced by Wilkes's North Briton.  Smollett lost
his last patron; he fell ill; his daughter died; he travelled
angrily in France and Italy.  His "Travels" show the choleric
nature of the man, and he was especially blamed for not admiring
the Venus de Medici.  Modern taste, enlightened by the works of a
better period of Greek art, has come round to Smollett's opinions.
But, in his own day, he was regarded as a Vandal and a heretic.

In 1764, he visited Scotland, and was warmly welcomed by his
kinsman, the laird of Bonhill.  In 1769, he published "The
Adventures of an Atom," a stupid, foul, and scurrilous political
satire, in which Lord Bute, having been his patron, was "lashed" in
Smollett's usual style.  In 1768, Smollett left England for ever.
He desired a consulship, but no consulship was found for him, which
is not surprising.  He died at Monte Nova, near Leghorn, in
September (others say October) 1771.  He had finished "Humphrey
Clinker," which appeared a day or two before his death.

Thackeray thought "Humphrey Clinker" the most laughable book that
ever was written.  Certainly nobody is to be envied who does not
laugh over the epistles of Winifred Jenkins.  The book is too well
known for analysis.  The family of Matthew Bramble, Esq., are on
their travels, with his nephew and niece, young Melford and Lydia
Melford, with Miss Jenkins, and the squire's tart, greedy, and
amorous old maid of a sister, Tabitha Bramble.  This lady's
persistent amours and mean avarice scarcely strike modern readers
as amusing.  Smollett gave aspects of his own character in the
choleric, kind, benevolent Matthew Bramble, and in the patriotic
and paradoxical Lieutenant Lismahago.  Bramble, a gouty invalid, is
as full of medical abominations as Smollett himself, as ready to
fight, and as generous and open-handed.  Probably the author shared
Lismahago's contempt of trade, his dislike of the Union (1707), his
fiery independence (yet he DOES marry Tabitha!), and those opinions
in which Lismahago heralds some of the social notions of Mr.
Ruskin.

Melford is an honourable kind of "walking gentleman"; Lydia, though
enamoured, is modest and dignified; Clinker is a worthy son of
Bramble, with abundant good humour, and a pleasing vein of Wesleyan
Methodism.  But the grotesque spelling, rural vanity, and naivete
of Winifred Jenkins, with her affection for her kitten, make her
the most delightful of this wandering company.  After beholding the
humours and partaking of the waters of Bath, they follow Smollett's
own Scottish tour, and each character gives his picture of the
country which Smollett had left at its lowest ebb of industry and
comfort, and found so much more prosperous.  The book is a mine for
the historian of manners and customs:  the novel-reader finds Count
Fathom metamorphosed into Mr. Grieve, an exemplary apothecary, "a
sincere convert to virtue," and "unaffectedly pious."

Apparently a wave of good-nature came over Smollett:  he forgave
everybody, his own relations even, and he reclaimed his villain.  A
patron might have played with him.  He mellowed in Scotland:
Matthew there became less tart, and more tolerant; an actual
English Matthew would have behaved quite otherwise. "Humphrey
Clinker" is an astonishing book, as the work of an exiled, poor,
and dying man.  None of his works leaves so admirable an impression
of Smollett's virtues:  none has so few of his less amiable
qualities.

With the cadet of Bonhill, outworn with living, and with labour,
died the burly, brawling, picturesque old English novel of humour
and of the road.  We have nothing notable in this manner, before
the arrival of Mr. Pickwick.  An exception will scarcely be made in
the interest of Richard Cumberland, who, as Scott says, "has
occasionally . . . become disgusting, when he meant to be
humorous."  Already Walpole had begun the new "Gothic romance," and
the "Castle of Otranto," with Miss Burney's novels, was to lead up
to Mrs. Radcliffe and Scott, to Miss Edgeworth and Miss Austen.



CHAPTER X:  NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE



Sainte-Beuve says somewhere that it is impossible to speak of "The
German Classics."  Perhaps he would not have allowed us to talk of
the American classics.  American literature is too nearly
contemporary.  Time has not tried it.  But, if America possesses a
classic author (and I am not denying that she may have several),
that author is decidedly Hawthorne.  His renown is unimpeached:
his greatness is probably permanent, because he is at once such an
original and personal genius, and such a judicious and determined
artist.

Hawthorne did not set himself to "compete with life."  He did not
make the effort--the proverbially tedious effort--to say
everything.  To his mind, fiction was not a mirror of commonplace
persons, and he was not the analyst of the minutest among their
ordinary emotions.  Nor did he make a moral, or social, or
political purpose the end and aim of his art.  Moral as many of his
pieces naturally are, we cannot call them didactic.  He did not
expect, nor intend, to better people by them.  He drew the Rev.
Arthur Dimmesdale without hoping that his Awful Example would
persuade readers to "make a clean breast" of their iniquities and
their secrets.  It was the moral situation that interested him, not
the edifying effect of his picture of that situation upon the minds
of novel-readers.

He set himself to write Romance, with a definite idea of what
Romance-writing should be; "to dream strange things, and make them
look like truth."  Nothing can be more remote from the modern
system of reporting commonplace things, in the hope that they will
read like truth.  As all painters must do, according to good
traditions, he selected a subject, and then placed it in a
deliberately arranged light--not in the full glare of the noonday
sun, and in the disturbances of wind, and weather, and cloud.
Moonshine filling a familiar chamber, and making it unfamiliar,
moonshine mixed with the "faint ruddiness on walls and ceiling" of
fire, was the light, or a clear brown twilight was the light by
which he chose to work.  So he tells us in the preface to "The
Scarlet Letter."  The room could be filled with the ghosts of old
dwellers in it; faint, yet distinct, all the life that had passed
through it came back, and spoke with him, and inspired him.  He
kept his eyes on these figures, tangled in some rare knot of Fate,
and of Desire:  these he painted, not attending much to the bustle
of existence that surrounded them, not permitting superfluous
elements to mingle with them, and to distract him.

The method of Hawthorne can be more easily traced than that of most
artists as great as himself.  Pope's brilliant passages and
disconnected trains of thought are explained when we remember that
"paper-sparing," as he says, he wrote two, or four, or six couplets
on odd, stray bits of casual writing material.  These he had to
join together, somehow, and between his "Orient Pearls at Random
Strung" there is occasionally "too much string," as Dickens once
said on another opportunity.  Hawthorne's method is revealed in his
published note-books.  In these he jotted the germ of an idea, the
first notion of a singular, perhaps supernatural moral situation.
Many of these he never used at all, on others he would dream, and
dream, till the persons in the situations became characters, and
the thing was evolved into a story.  Thus he may have invented such
a problem as this:  "The effect of a great, sudden sin on a simple
and joyous nature," and thence came all the substance of "The
Marble Faun" ("Transformation").  The original and germinal idea
would naturally divide itself into another, as the protozoa
reproduce themselves.  Another idea was the effect of nearness to
the great crime on a pure and spotless nature:  hence the character
of Hilda.  In the preface to "The Scarlet Letter," Hawthorne shows
us how he tried, by reflection and dream, to warm the vague persons
of the first mere notion or hint into such life as characters in
romance inherit.  While he was in the Civil Service of his country,
in the Custom House at Salem, he could not do this; he needed
freedom.  He was dismissed by political opponents from office, and
instantly he was himself again, and wrote his most popular and,
perhaps, his best book.  The evolution of his work was from the
prime notion (which he confessed that he loved best when "strange")
to the short story, and thence to the full and rounded novel.  All
his work was leisurely.  All his language was picked, though not
with affectation.  He did not strive to make a style out of the use
of odd words, or of familiar words in odd places.  Almost always he
looked for "a kind of spiritual medium, seen through which" his
romances, like the Old Manse in which he dwelt, "had not quite the
aspect of belonging to the material world."

The spiritual medium which he liked, he was partly born into, and
partly he created it.  The child of a race which came from England,
robust and Puritanic, he had in his veins the blood of judges--of
those judges who burned witches and persecuted Quakers.  His fancy
is as much influenced by the old fanciful traditions of Providence,
of Witchcraft, of haunting Indian magic, as Scott's is influenced
by legends of foray and feud, by ballad, and song, and old wives'
tales, and records of conspiracies, fire-raisings, tragic love-
adventures, and border wars.  Like Scott, Hawthorne lived in
phantasy--in phantasy which returned to the romantic past, wherein
his ancestors had been notable men.  It is a commonplace, but an
inevitable commonplace, to add that he was filled with the idea of
Heredity, with the belief that we are all only new combinations of
our fathers that were before us.  This has been made into a kind of
pseudo-scientific doctrine by M. Zola, in the long series of his
Rougon-Macquart novels.  Hawthorne treated it with a more delicate
and a serener art in "The House of the Seven Gables."

It is curious to mark Hawthorne's attempts to break away from
himself--from the man that heredity, and circumstance, and the
divine gift of genius had made him.  He naturally "haunts the
mouldering lodges of the past"; but when he came to England (where
such lodges are abundant), he was ill-pleased and cross-grained.
He knew that a long past, with mysteries, dark places, malisons,
curses, historic wrongs, was the proper atmosphere of his art.  But
a kind of conscientious desire to be something other than himself--
something more ordinary and popular--make him thank Heaven that his
chosen atmosphere was rare in his native land.  He grumbled at it,
when he was in the midst of it; he grumbled in England; and how he
grumbled in Rome!  He permitted the American Eagle to make her nest
in his bosom, "with the customary infirmity of temper that
characterises this unhappy fowl," as he says in his essay "The
Custom House."  "The general truculency of her attitude" seems to
"threaten mischief to the inoffensive community" of Europe, and
especially of England and Italy.

Perhaps Hawthorne travelled too late, when his habits were too much
fixed.  It does not become Englishmen to be angry because a voyager
is annoyed at not finding everything familiar and customary in
lands which he only visits because they are strange.  This is an
inconsistency to which English travellers are particularly prone.
But it is, in Hawthorne's case, perhaps, another instance of his
conscientious attempts to be, what he was not, very much like other
people.  His unexpected explosions of Puritanism, perhaps, are
caused by the sense of being too much himself.  He speaks of "the
Squeamish love of the Beautiful" as if the love of the Beautiful
were something unworthy of an able-bodied citizen.  In some arts,
as in painting and sculpture, his taste was very far from being at
home, as his Italian journals especially prove.  In short, he was
an artist in a community for long most inartistic.  He could not do
what many of us find very difficult--he could not take Beauty with
gladness as it comes, neither shrinking from it as immoral, nor
getting girlishly drunk upon it, in the aesthetic fashion, and
screaming over it in an intoxication of surprise.  His tendency was
to be rather shy and afraid of Beauty, as a pleasant but not
immaculately respectable acquaintance.  Or, perhaps, he was merely
deferring to Anglo-Saxon public opinion.

Possibly he was trying to wean himself from himself, and from his
own genius, when he consorted with odd amateur socialists in farm-
work, and when he mixed, at Concord, with the "queer, strangely-
dressed, oddly-behaved mortals, most of whom took upon themselves
to be important agents of the world's destiny, yet were simple
bores of a very intense water."  They haunted Mr. Emerson as they
haunted Shelley, and Hawthorne had to see much of them.  But they
neither made a convert of him, nor irritated him into resentment.
His long-enduring kindness to the unfortunate Miss Delia Bacon, an
early believer in the nonsense about Bacon and Shakespeare, was a
model of manly and generous conduct.  He was, indeed, an admirable
character, and his goodness had the bloom on it of a courteous and
kindly nature that loved the Muses.  But, as one has ventured to
hint, the development of his genius and taste was hampered now and
then, apparently, by a desire to put himself on the level of the
general public, and of their ideas.  This, at least, is how one
explains to oneself various remarks in his prefaces, journals, and
note-books.  This may account for the moral allegories which too
weirdly haunt some of his short, early pieces.  Edgar Poe, in a
passage full of very honest and well-chosen praise, found fault
with the allegorical business.

Mr. Hutton, from whose "Literary Essays" I borrow Poe's opinion,
says:  "Poe boldly asserted that the conspicuously ideal
scaffoldings of Hawthorne's stories were but the monstrous fruits
of the bad transcendental atmosphere which he breathed so long."
But I hope this way of putting it is not Poe's.  "Ideal
scaffoldings," are odd enough, but when scaffoldings turn out to be
"fruits" of an "atmosphere," and monstrous fruits of a "bad
transcendental atmosphere," the brain reels in the fumes of mixed
metaphors.  "Let him mend his pen," cried Poe, "get a bottle of
visible ink, come out from the Old Manse, cut Mr. Alcott," and, in
fact, write about things less impalpable, as Mr. Mallock's heroine
preferred to be loved, "in a more human sort of way."

Hawthorne's way was never too ruddily and robustly human.  Perhaps,
even in "The Scarlet Letter," we feel too distinctly that certain
characters are moral conceptions, not warmed and wakened out of the
allegorical into the real.  The persons in an allegory may be real
enough, as Bunyan has proved by examples.  But that culpable
clergyman, Mr. Arthur Dimmesdale, with his large, white brow, his
melancholy eyes, his hand on his heart, and his general resemblance
to the High Church Curate in Thackeray's "Our Street," is he real?
To me he seems very unworthy to be Hester's lover, for she is a
beautiful woman of flesh and blood.  Mr. Dimmesdale was not only
immoral; he was unsportsmanlike.  He had no more pluck than a
church-mouse.  His miserable passion was degraded by its brevity;
how could he see this woman's disgrace for seven long years, and
never pluck up heart either to share her shame or peccare forliter?
He is a lay figure, very cleverly, but somewhat conventionally made
and painted.  The vengeful husband of Hester, Roger Chillingworth,
is a Mr. Casaubon stung into jealous anger.  But his attitude,
watching ever by Dimmesdale, tormenting him, and yet in his
confidence, and ever unsuspected, reminds one of a conception dear
to Dickens.  He uses it in "David Copperfield," where Mr. Micawber
(of all people!) plays this trick on Uriah Heep; he uses it in
"Hunted Down"; he was about using it in "Edwin Drood"; he used it
(old Martin and Pecksniff) in "Martin Chuzzlewit."  The person of
Roger Chillingworth and his conduct are a little too melodramatic
for Hawthorne's genius.

In Dickens's manner, too, is Hawthorne's long sarcastic address to
Judge Pyncheon (in "The House of the Seven Gables"), as the judge
sits dead in his chair, with his watch ticking in his hand.
Occasionally a chance remark reminds one of Dickens; this for
example:  He is talking of large, black old books of divinity, and
of their successors, tiny books, Elzevirs perhaps.  "These little
old volumes impressed me as if they had been intended for very
large ones, but had been unfortunately blighted at an early stage
of their growth."  This might almost deceive the elect as a piece
of the true Boz.  Their widely different talents did really
intersect each other where the perverse, the grotesque, and the
terrible dwell.

To myself "The House of the Seven Gables" has always appeared the
most beautiful and attractive of Hawthorne's novels.  He actually
gives us a love story, and condescends to a pretty heroine.  The
curse of "Maule's Blood" is a good old romantic idea, terribly
handled.  There is more of lightness, and of a cobwebby dusty
humour in Hepzibah Pyncheon, the decayed lady shopkeeper, than
Hawthorne commonly cares to display.  Do you care for the "first
lover," the Photographer's Young Man?  It may be conventional
prejudice, but I seem to see him going about on a tricycle, and I
don't think him the right person for Phoebe.  Perhaps it is really
the beautiful, gentle, oppressed Clifford who haunts one's memory
most, a kind of tragic and thwarted Harold Skimpole. "How pleasant,
how delightful," he murmured, but not as if addressing any one.
"Will it last?  How balmy the atmosphere through that open window!
An open window!  How beautiful that play of sunshine.  Those
flowers, how very fragrant!  That young girl's face, how cheerful,
how blooming.  A flower with the dew on it, and sunbeams in the
dewdrops . . . "  This comparison with Skimpole may sound like an
unkind criticism of Clifford's character and place in the story--it
is only a chance note of a chance resemblance.

Indeed, it may be that Hawthorne himself was aware of the
resemblance.  "An individual of Clifford's character," he remarks,
"can always be pricked more acutely through his sense of the
beautiful and harmonious than through his heart."  And he suggests
that, if Clifford had not been so long in prison, his aesthetic
zeal "might have eaten out or filed away his affections."  This was
what befell Harold Skimpole--himself "in prisons often"--at
Coavinses!  The Judge Pyncheon of the tale is also a masterly study
of swaggering black-hearted respectability, and then, in addition
to all the poetry of his style, and the charm of his haunted air,
Hawthorne favours us with a brave conclusion of the good sort, the
old sort.  They come into money, they marry, they are happy ever
after.  This is doing things handsomely, though some of our modern
novelists think it coarse and degrading.  Hawthorne did not think
so, and they are not exactly better artists than Hawthorne.

Yet he, too, had his economies, which we resent.  I do not mean his
not telling us what it was that Roger Chillingworth saw on Arthur
Dimmesdale's bare breast.  To leave that vague is quite legitimate.
But what had Miriam and the spectre of the Catacombs done?  Who was
the spectre?  What did he want?  To have told all this would have
been better than to fill the novel with padding about Rome,
sculpture, and the Ethics of Art.  As the silly saying runs:  "the
people has a right to know" about Miriam and her ghostly
acquaintance. {10}  But the "Marble Faun" is not of Hawthorne's
best period, beautiful as are a hundred passages in the tale.

Beautiful passages are as common in his prose as gold in the
richest quartz.  How excellent are his words on the first faint but
certain breath of Autumn in the air, felt, perhaps, early in July.
"And then came Autumn, with his immense burthen of apples, dropping
them continually from his overladen shoulders as he trudged along."
Keats might have written so of Autumn in the orchards--if Keats had
been writing prose.

There are geniuses more sunny, large, and glad than Hawthorne's,
none more original, more surefooted, in his own realm of moonlight
and twilight.



CHAPTER XI:  THE PARADISE OF POETS



We were talking of Love, Constancy, the Ideal.  "Who ever loved
like the poets?" cried Lady Violet Lebas, her pure, pale cheek
flushing.  "Ah, if ever I am to love, he shall be a singer!"

"Tenors are popular, very," said Lord Walter.

"I mean a poet," she answered witheringly.

Near them stood Mr. Witham, the author of "Heart's Chords Tangled."

"Ah," said he, "that reminds me.  I have been trying to catch it
all the morning.  That reminds me of my dream."

"Tell us your dream," murmured Lady Violet Lebas, and he told it.

"It was through an unfortunate but pardonable blunder," said Mr.
Witham, "that I died, and reached the Paradise of Poets.  I had,
indeed, published volumes of verse, but with the most blameless
motives.  Other poets were continually sending me theirs, and, as I
could not admire them, and did not like to reply by critical
remarks, I simply printed some rhymes for the purpose of sending
them to the gentlemen who favoured me with theirs.  I always wrote
on the fly-leaf a quotation from the "Iliad," about giving copper
in exchange for gold; and the few poets who could read Greek were
gratified, while the others, probably, thought a compliment was
intended.  Nothing could be less culpable or pretentious, but,
through some mistake on the part of Charon, I was drafted off to
the Paradise of Poets.

"Outside the Golden Gate a number of Shadows were waiting, in
different attitudes of depression and languor.  Bavius and Maevius
were there, still complaining of 'cliques,' railing at Horace for a
mere rhymer of society, and at Virgil as a plagiarist, 'Take away
his cribs from Homer and Apollonius Rhodius,' quoth honest Maevius,
'and what is there left of him?'  I also met a society of
gentlemen, in Greek costume, of various ages, from a half-naked
minstrel with a tortoiseshell lyre in his hand to an elegant of the
age of Pericles.  They all consorted together, talking various
dialects of Aeolic, Ionian, Attic Greek, and so forth, which were
plainly not intelligible to each other.  I ventured to ask one of
the company who he was, but he, with a sweep of his hand, said, 'We
are Homer!'  When I expressed my regret and surprise that the
Golden Gate had not yet opened for so distinguished, though
collective, an artist, my friend answered that, according to Fick,
Peppmuller, and many other learned men, they were Homer.  'But an
impostor from Chios has got in somehow,' he said; 'they don't pay
the least attention to the Germans in the Paradise of Poets.'

"At this moment the Golden Gates were thrown apart, and a fair
lady, in an early Italian costume, carrying a laurel in her hand,
appeared at the entrance.  All the Shadows looked up with an air of
weary expectation, like people waiting for their turn in a doctor's
consulting-room.  She beckoned to me, however, and I made haste to
follow her.  The words 'Charlatan!'  'You a poet!' in a variety of
languages, greeted me by way of farewell from the Shadows.

"'The renowned Laura, if I am not mistaken,' I ventured to remark,
recognising her, indeed, from the miniature in the Laurentian
library at Florence.

"She bowed, and I began to ask for her adorer, Petrarch.

"'Excuse me,' said Laura, as we glided down a mossy path, under the
shade of trees particularly dear to poets, 'excuse me, but the
sonneteer of whom you speak is one whose name I cannot bear to
mention.  His conduct with Burns's Clarinda, his heartless
infatuation for Stella--'

"'You astonish me,' I said.  'In the Paradise of Poets--'

"'They are poets still--incorrigible!' answered the lady; then
slightly raising her voice of silver, as a beautiful appearance in
a toga drew near, she cried 'Catullo mio!'

"The greeting between these accomplished ghosts was too kindly to
leave room for doubt as to the ardour of their affections.

"'Will you, my Catullus,' murmured Laura, 'explain to this poet
from the land of fogs, any matters which, to him, may seem puzzling
and unfamiliar in our Paradise?'

"The Veronese, with a charming smile, took my hand, and led me to a
shadowy arbour, whence we enjoyed a prospect of many rivers and
mountains in the poets' heaven.  Among these I recognised the
triple crest of the Eildons, Grongar Hill, Cithaeron and Etna;
while the reed-fringed waters of the Mincius flowed musically
between the banks and braes o' bonny Doon to join the Tweed.
Blithe ghosts were wandering by, in all varieties of apparel, and I
distinctly observed Dante's Beatrice, leaning loving on the arm of
Sir Philip Sidney, while Dante was closely engaged in conversation
with the lost Lenore, celebrated by Mr. Edgar Allan Poe.

"'In what can my knowledge of the Paradise of Poets be serviceable
to you, sir?' said Catullus, as he flung himself at the feet of
Laura, on the velvet grass.

"'I am disinclined to seem impertinently curious,' I answered, 'but
the ladies in this fair, smiling country--have the gods made them
poetical?'

"'Not generally,' replied Catullus.  'Indeed, if you would be well
with them, I may warn you never to mention poetry in their hearing.
They never cared for it while on earth, and in this place it is a
topic which the prudent carefully avoid among ladies.  To tell the
truth, they have had to listen to far too much poetry, and too many
discussions on the caesura.  There are, indeed, a few lady poets--
very few.  Sappho, for example; indeed I cannot recall any other at
this moment.  The result is that Phaon, of all the shadows here, is
the most distinguished by the fair.  He was not a poet, you know;
he got in on account of Sappho, who adored him.  They are estranged
now, of course.'

"'You interest me deeply,' I answered.  'And now, will you kindly
tell me why these ladies are here, if they were not poets?'

"'The women that were our ideals while we dwelt on earth, the women
we loved but never won, or, at all events, never wedded, they for
whom we sighed while in the arms of a recognised and legitimate
affection, have been chosen by the Olympians to keep us company in
Paradise!'

"'Then wherefore,' I interrupted, 'do I see Robert Burns loitering
with that lady in a ruff,--Cassandra, I make no doubt--Ronsard's
Cassandra?  And why is the incomparable Clarinda inseparable from
Petrarch; and Miss Patty Blount, Pope's flame, from the Syrian
Meleager, while HIS Heliodore is manifestly devoted to Mr. Emerson,
whom, by the way, I am delighted, if rather surprised, to see
here?'

"'Ah,' said Catullus, 'you are a new-comer among us.  Poets will be
poets, and no sooner have they attained their desire, and dwelt in
the company of their earthly Ideals, than they feel strangely, yet
irresistibly drawn to Another.  So it was in life, so it will ever
be.  No Ideal can survive a daily companionship, and fortunate is
the poet who did not marry his first love!'

"'As far as that goes,' I answered, 'most of you were highly
favoured; indeed, I do not remember any poet whose Ideal was his
wife, or whose first love led him to the altar.'

"'I was not a marrying man myself,' answered the Veronese; 'few of
us were.  Myself, Horace, Virgil--we were all bachelors.'

"'And Lesbia!'

"I said this in a low voice, for Laura was weaving bay into a
chaplet, and inattentive to our conversation.

"'Poor Lesbia!' said Catullus, with a suppressed sigh.  'How I
misjudged that girl!  How cruel, how causeless were my reproaches,'
and wildly rending his curled locks and laurel crown, he fled into
a thicket, whence there soon arose the melancholy notes of the
Ausonian lyre.'

"'He is incorrigible,' said Laura, very coldly; and she
deliberately began to tear and toss away the fragments of the
chaplet she had been weaving.  'I shall never break him of that
habit of versifying.  But they are all alike.'

"'Is there nobody here,' said I, 'who is happy with his Ideal--
nobody but has exchanged Ideals with some other poet?'

"'There is one,' she said.  'He comes of a northern tribe; and in
his life-time he never rhymed upon his unattainable lady, or if
rhyme he did, the accents never carried her name to the ears of the
vulgar.  Look there.'

"She pointed to the river at our feet, and I knew the mounted
figure that was riding the ford, with a green-mantled lady beside
him like the Fairy Queen.

"Surely I had read of her, and knew her -


"'She whose blue eyes their secret told,
Though shaded by her locks of gold.'



Back to Full Books