The Afghan Wars 1839-42 and 1878-80byArchibald Forbes

Bamian; replaces Sale in command; heads a sortie from Jellalabad; in the
council of war; commands the centre at the great sortie and is killed.

DENNIS, Colonel.

DODGIN, Captain, valour in the retreat.

DOORANEES, the.

DOST MAHOMED, origin; early career; asks for terms; forsaken by his
troops; a fugitive; in Bokhara and Khooloom; at Bamian and Kohistan;
surrenders to Macnaghten; sent into British India; to be allowed to
return to Afghanistan; his return to his sovereignty; dies.

DREW, Colonel, enters the Peiwar Kotul.

DUNCAN, General.

DUNDAS, Captain, killed at Sherpur.

DUNHAM-MASSY, Brigadier-General.

DURAND, on the siege of Herat; on Lord Auckland's manifesto; on
Macnaghten's appointment; at siege of Ghuznee; on the restoration of Shah
Soojah; on Dost Mahomed's surrender; on the retreat on Jellalabad; on
Macnaghten's ill-faith.

E.

EDWARDES, Sir Henry, on Lord Auckland's manifesto.

ELLENBOROUGH, Lord, on Sale's brigade; first manifesto; vacillations;
orders the removal of the gates of Somnath from Sultan Mahmoud's tomb;
reception of the returning armies.

ELLIS, Mr, British Envoy to Persia.

ELPHINSTONE, General; succeeds Cotton in chief command; his character and
infirmities; orders Sale to return to Cabul; about to leave India; orders
the abandonment of the Commissariat fort; the Duke of Wellington's
verdict on his position; hopeless; 'scents treachery'; calls upon
Pottinger to open negotiations; in the retreat; consents to hand over the
ladies; and their husbands; refuses Akbar's proposal that the Europeans
should lay down their arms; conference; made a hostage; at Jugdulluk;
death.

ELPHINSTONE, Mr, on the Afghan expedition.

ENGLAND, Brigadier, defeated at the Kojuk pass.

EVATT, Surgeon-Major, on the 'Death March.'

EYRE, Vincent, opinion on Shelton's defeat at Behmaroo; description of
the sufferings of the retreat; his 'Captivity.'.

F.

FANE, Sir Harry, Commander-in-Chief; heads the expedition to Cabul.

FARRINGTON, routs Uktar Khan at Zemindawar.

FEROZEPORE.

FORBES, Lieutenant, of the 92d Highlanders, killed at the Takht-i-Shah.

FRASER'S BENGAL CAVALRY at Purwan Durrah.

FROME, Captain, killed in the battle of Candahar.

FUTTEHABAD.

FUTTEH ALI, Shah of Persia.

FUTTEH JUNG, second son and successor of Shah Soojah; abdicates.

FUTTEH KHAN, eldest brother of Dost Mahomed, his fate.

G.

GALBRAITH, Colonel, killed at Maiwand.

GARMAO HILLS, the.

GHAZEES.

GHILZAIS, the; description of; brave conduct of under the 'Gooroo,'; gain
terms from Macgregor; attack Sale's force; slaughter by, in the Khoord
Cabul; hang on the rear of the retreat; slaughter by, at Jugdulluk;
attack Pollock; harass Money.

GHIRISHK.

GHUZNEE. siege of; occupied by British troops; surrendered to the
Afghans; retaken by Nott.

GOAD, Captain, killed.

GOOL MAHOMED KHAN.

GOORKHA REGIMENTS.

GOOROO, the Ghilzai leader.

GORDON, Colonel, his command in the attack on the Spingawai and Peiwar
Kotuls.

GORDON, General Charles, against keeping Candahar.

GOREBUND RIVER, the.

GORTSCHAKOFF.

GOUGH, Captain, with the 9th Lancers; in the charge of December 11th.

GOUGH, General Charles.

GOUGH, General Hugh.

GRANT, Dr, gallant conduct at Charikar.

GREEN, in the Retreat.

GRENADIERS, its, the.

GRIFFIN, Sir Lepel, his mission to arrange for the succession to Yakoub
Khan; on the retention of Candahar.

GRIFFITHS, Major, gallant march from Kubbar-i-Jubbar; storms Mahomed
Shereef's fort.

GUIDES, the; in the attack on the Beni-Hissar.

GUL KOH RIDGE, the.

GUNDAMUK, Sale's council of war at; final tragedy of the Retreat near;
evacuated; Pollock's troops concentrate at; treaty of 1879; conclusion
of.

GUNDIGAN.

GWAGA PASS, the.

H.

HABIB KILLA.

HADJI KHAN KHAKUR.

HAINES, Sir F., Commander-in-Chief.

HALL, Captain.

HAMILTON, Lieutenant W. R. P., V.C., with Cavagnari at Cabul; killed.

HAMLEY, Sir Edward, in favour of keeping Candahar.

HANZ-I-MADAT.

HARDY, Lieutenant, killed.

HASSAN ABDUL.

HASSAN KHAN, governor of Maidan, killed.

HAUGHTON, desperately wounded in the Charikar disaster.

HAVELOCK, Captain Henry, aide-de-camp to Sir W. Cotton; on Shah Soojah's
reception in Candahar; description of Shah Soojah; staff officer to Sale;
authenticates Broadfoot's account of Sale's council of war at Jellalabad;
in the great sortie from Jellalabad.

HAY, at the siege of Ghuznee.

HAZARAS, horde of.

HELMUND RIVER, the.

HENSMAN, Mr; on the defence of Sherpur; on the battle of Ahmed Khel; on
Abdurrahman.

HERAT, Persia and; siege of, by the Persians; independent; Macnaghten
presses for an expedition against; Ayoub Khan in; Ayoub driven from, by
Abdurrahman.

HIGHLANDERS, the 72d and 92d.

HILLS, Major-General, governor of Cabul.

HINDOO KOOSH, the.

HOBHOUSE, Sir John Cam, Lord Broughton, president of the Board of
Control, claims the responsibility of the first Afghan war in 1851,
contradictory statement in 1842.

HUFT KOTUL, the; last stand of the Afghans at.

HUGHES, Brigadier-General, at Ahmed Khel.

HUME, General.

HYDERABAD.

HYDER KHAN, son of Dost Mahomed, and governor of Ghuznee, taken prisoner.

HYDRABAD.

I.

INDIAN CONTINGENT in the Mediterranean, the.

INDIKEE, mutinous sepoys captured in.

INDUS, the.

IRRAWADY, the.

ISTALIF, a Kohistan village destroyed.

JACOB'S RIFLES (30th Native Infantry) at the Maiwand disaster.

JADRAN.

JAZEE, Anderson encounters Ghilzais at.

JELLALABAD; British troops quartered in; march on resolved upon; Durand's
opinion of; Akbar's conditions for the evacuation of; defence of; Pollock
at; Elphinstone buried at; partially destroyed; Sir S. Browne's camp
near; disaster to the 10th Hussars near.

JENKINS, Colonel, of the Guides; storms the Asmai heights; adroit
evacuation of Asmai heights.

JENKINS, William, Secretary to Cavagnari.

JOHNSON, Captain, in charge of the Treasury at Cabul; hostage; arranges
the redemption of the captives.

JOHNSON, Colonel Alured, commands the artillery in the Great March.

JUBBUR KHAN, brother to Dost Mahomed, 28; in charge of Dost Mahomed's
family at Khooloom.

JUGDULLUK VALLEY, the; retreating column harassed at; slaughter at;
captives arrive at; Pollock engaged with Ghilzais at.

JULGAH FORT, the, Sale fails to take.

JUMROOD.


K.

KAMRAN, Shah of Herat.

KAREZAH.

KAREZ HILL, the.

KAREZ MEER.

KARRACK.

KATA KUSTIA.

KATTIAWAR.

KAUFMANN, General.

KAYE, Sir John; history of the Afghan war; opinion of Burnes; account of
Macnaghten's murder.

KEANE, Sir John, Commander-in-Chief of the Bombay army; marches towards
Hyderabad; his character; marches on Cabul; siege of Ghuznee; camp near
Cabul.

KELLY, Dr Ambrose, with Cavagnari.

KERSHAW, at siege of Ghuznee.

KHAKREZ VALLEY, the.

KHAROTI HILL, the.

KHEL AKHUND.

KHELAT; occupied by Nott.

KHELAT, Khans of. See MEERAB, NUSSEER.

KHELAT-I-GHILZAI; occupied by Nott; garrisoned; garrison withdrawn; one
of the stages on the Great March.

KHIG.

KHIVA.

KHODA BUXSH.

KHOOLOOM; Akbar at.

KHOOLOOM, Wali of.

KHOST VALLEY, the.

KHUSHK-I-NAKHUD, skirmish at.

KHYBER-Jellalabad-Gundamuk route, the.

KHYBER PASS, the; the clans of; Ghilzais intercept the communication by;
Wild fails to force; Pollock marches through; Cavagnari turned back from;
question of the retention of; evacuated.

KILLA ABDOOLLA.

KILLA KAZEE; Massy at.

KING'S GARDEN, the, at Cabul.

KNOWLES.

KOHDAMAN.

KOH-I-NOOR, the, taken by Runjeet Singh from Shah Soojah.

KOHISTAN, Dost Mahomed in.

KOJUK PASS, the; Brigadier England repulsed at.

KOKORAN.

KOLUM-DIL-KHAN.

KOTWAL OF CABUL, the, tried for the massacre of Cavagnari, etc.

KONDOOZ.

KOTTREE.

KUBBAR-I-JUBBAR.

KURAM VALLEY, the.

KURDURRAH.

KUSHI; General Roberts meets Yakoub Khan at.

KUTTI SUNG.

L.

LAHORE, Mr Clerk at.

LAKE.

LANCERS, the 9th.

LANCERS, Bengal, the.

LAWRENCE, Captain, warns Macnaghten; made prisoner; sends messages from
the chiefs to Elphinstone; description of the retreat; made hostage; in
captivity.

LAWRENCE, Lord, his 'masterly inactivity;' against keeping Candahar.

LEACH, Major.

LOCKHART.

LOGUR VALLEY, the; plain; river.

LOODIANAH, Shah Soojah's refuge in.

LORD, Dr, political officer in the Bamian district; killed at Purwan
Durrah.

LOVEDAY, Lieutenant, political officer at Khelat, barbarously murdered.

LUGHMAN VALLEY, the.

LUGHMANEE, Pottinger besieged in.

LUNDI KOTUL.

LUTTABUND.

LYTTON, Lord, Viceroy, 1876; his instructions; ratifies the treaty of
Gunda-Gundamuk; prepares to revenge Cavagnari; decides that Yakoub Khan
does not return to Afghanistan; recommends Abdurrahman.

M.

MACGREGOR, Brigadier-General Charles, C. B., chief of Sir F. Roberts'
staff; recovers the guns at Baghwana; in the Great March; in the battle
of Candahar.

MACGREGOR, Major, deceived by the Ghilzai chief of Tezeen; Sale's
adviser.

MACKENZIE, Captain Colin, at the defeat of Dost Mahomed near Bamian;
gallant conduct of; with Macnaghten; a hostage; story of the Retreat.

MACKENZIE, Captain Stuart, gallant conduct of.

MACKESON, political officer at Peshawur.

MACKRELL, Colonel, killed at the storming of the Rikabashee fort.

MACLAINE, Lieutenant, of the Horse Artillery, in the Maiwand disaster;
taken prisoner; murdered.

MACLAREN.

MACNAGHTEN, Lady; in the Retreat.

MACNAGHTEN, Sir William Hay, envoy to Shah Soojah, influence with Lord
Auckland; his use of bribery; on the reception of the Shah at Candahar;
enters Cabul with Shah Soojah; convinced of the Shah's popularity; real
sovereign of Afghanistan; his mistakes; relations with the Ghilzais;
consents to the abandonment of the Balla Hissar; relations with Herat;
nervous about the communication; relation with Dost Mahomed; proposes to
put a price on his head; receives his surrender; his peculiar
temperament; his finance; discovers the unpopularity of the Shah; his
conduct to the 'Gooroo' and Ghilzais; appointed Governor of Bombay;
called upon to retrench; his conduct to Elphinstone; despatches Sale; his
quarters at Cabul; demands the reduction of the Rikabashee fort;
depression; negotiation about the Retreat; murdered.

MACPHERSON, Brigadier-General; in the December operations round Cabul; in
the Great March; in the battle of Candahar.

MAHMOOD KHAN, fort of.

MAHMOUD SHAH, brother of Shah Soojah.

MAHOMED HASSAN KHAN, Abdurrahman's governor of Candahar, defeated by
Ayoub.

MAHOMED JAN, a Warduk general, defends the Asmai heights; attacked by
Massy and Macpherson; attack on the Sherpur cantonments.

MAHOMED MEERZA, Shah of Persia, his ambition, designs on Herat.

MAHOMED SHAH KHAN, Akbar's lieutenant.

MAHOMED SHEREEF, fort of.

MAHOMED SURWAR, agent of Sir Lepel Griffin.

MAHOMED ZEMAUN KHAN.

MAIDAN PLAIN, the.

MAINWARING, Mrs, in the Retreat.

MAIWAND; disaster at; battle at, between Mahomed Hassan and Ayoub.

MANDERSON.

MANGAL.

MARSHALL, Colonel, routs Nusseer Khan.

MASSY, Brigadier-General; occupies the Shutargurdan pass; takes
possession of the Sherpur cantonments; in the attack on Mahomed Jan; in
the defence of the Sherpur cantonments.

MAUDE, General.

MAULE, Lieutenant.

MAZRA; Ayoub's camp at, during battle of Candahar.

M'CASKILL, Brigadier-General, with Pollock; in the last skirmishes.

MEER AKHOR FORT, the, blown up.

MEER BUTCHA, a chief of Kohistan.

MEERZA AHMED, a Dooranee chief.

MEHRAB, Khan of Khelat.

MICHNAI PASS, the.

M'Neill, British Envoy to Persia.

MOHUN LAL, agent for Macnaghten's 'blood money.'

MONEY, Colonel, left to hold the Shutargurdan pass; brought out by Gough;
in the battle of Candahar.

MONTEATH, Colonel, sent against the Ghilzais; in the council of war at
Jellalabad; at the great sortie.

MONTENARO, Captain, killed at the Meer Akhor fort.

MONTGOMERY, Sir Robert, against keeping Candahar.

MOOKOOR.

MOOLLA SHIKORE, Shah Soojah's minister.

MOOLTAN.

MOORE, Elphinstone's servant.

MORGAN.

MULLA SAHIBDAD.

MUNDABAD.

MURCHA PASS.

MUSA KHAN, heir of Yakoub Khan.

MUSHAKI.

MUSHK-I-ALUM, a Moulla of Ghuznee; his influence; governor of Cabul,
fires the beacon on the Asmai heights.

MUSTAPHI, the, punished for the Cavagnari massacre.

N.

NAGHLOO.

NANUCHEE PASS, the.

NAPIER, Lieutenant Scott, of the 92d Highlanders.

NAPIER, Lord, of Magdala, in favour of keeping Candahar.

NEK MAHOMED KHAN, Afghan commander at the battle of Charasiah.

NEPAUL.

NEVILLE, of the Bengal Lancers.

NICHOLL, Captain, his heroism in the Retreat.

NIJRAO.

NORMAN, Sir Henry, against keeping Candahar.

NORTHBROOK, Lord, relations with Shere Ali.

NOTT, General; in command at Candahar; occupies Khelat; his character;
discipline; disagrees with Macnaghten; receives orders from Elphinstone
to evacuate Candahar, refuses to obey; fighting with Meerza Ahmed; his
letter to Brigadier England; Lord Ellenborough repeats orders to evacuate
Candahar, obeys; marches towards Cabul; drives Afghans out of Ghuznee;
refuses to aid in the rescue of the prisoners.

NUGENT, Lieutenant, killed.

NUSSEER, Khan of Khelat.

NUTTALL, General.

O.

OLDFIELD, Captain, in the Council of War at Jellalabad.

ORENBURG.

OSMAN KHAN.

OUTRAM pursues Dost Mahomed; raid on the Ghilzais.

P.

PALLISER, Brigadier-General.

PALMER, Colonel, tortured.

PALMERSTON'S, Lord, ultimatum to Persia.

PANJSHIR RIVER, the.

PASKEVITCH, General.

PATHANS.

PEAT, Captain, at siege of Ghuznee.

PEIWAR PASS, the.

PELLY, Sir Lewis, at the conference of Peshawur.

PEROFFSKY.

PERSIA, relations between Great Britain and.

PESHAWUR.

PESHBOLAK.

PETROFFSKY, a Russian writer.

PHAYRE, Brigadier-General.

PICQUET HILL, the, attacked by Ayoub Khan.

PIONEERS, the.

PISHEEN VALLEY, the; retained by us.

POLLOCK, General; arrives in Peshawur; at Jellalabad; his qualifications;
his work; the rescue and retribution; contrast between Nott and; arrives
at Cabul; punishment of Cabul.

PONSONBY, with Fraser's Bengal Cavalry in Purwan Durrah.

POOLE, Captain, wounded.

POTTINGER, Major, defends Herat against the Persians; warns Macnaghten of
the danger in Kohistan; in the disaster at Charikar; conducts
negotiations for the retreat; a hostage.

POWELL, Captain, killed.

POYNDAH KHAN, father to Dost Mahomed.

PRIMROSE, General; in the battle of Candahar.

PUNJAUB REGIMENTS.

PUNJAUB, the.

PURWAN DURRAH VALLEY, the.

Q.

QUETTA; occupied.

R.

RATTRAY.

RAWLINSON, Sir Henry; his warnings to Macnaghten; Macnaghten's orders to,
respecting Uktar Khan; in favour of retaining Candahar.

RAWUL PINDI.

RHOTAS HEIGHTS, the.

RIKABASHEE FORT, the.

RIPON, Marquis of, Viceroy; in favour of the settlement with Abdurrahman;
sanctions General Roberts' March on Candahar.

ROBAT, Great March ends at.

ROBERTS, Colonel.

ROBERTS, Sir Frederick, in command of the Kuram column; his scheme of
operations; battle of the Peiwar Kotul; his previous career; with the
army of invasion; battle of Charasiah; at Cabul; revenge for Cavagnari;
intercourse with Yakoub Khan; in the Sherpur cantonment; active
operations round Cabul; on the defensive in Sherpur; the Great March on
Candahar; battle of Candahar; in favour of keeping Candahar.

ROREE.

ROSE, Ensign, in the retreat from Charikar.

ROSS, Major-General John; in the Great March; in the battle of Candahar.

RUNJEET SINGH Sikh ruler of the Punjaub, treatment of Shah Soojah;
occupies Peshawur; death.

RUSSIA, relations with Persia; policy towards Dost Mahomed; Afghanistan
to be used as a 'buffer state' between British India and; Russo-Turkish
war; relations with Abdurrahman; opinion of Roberts on Afghanistan and.

S.

SAFI TRIBE, the, engage Macpherson.

SALE, Lady, her journal; account of the Retreat; Akbar's kindness to.

SALE, Sir Robert; at siege of Ghuznee; in command at Cabul; chastises the
Kohistanees; his character; fighting in the Khoord Cabul at Bootkhak; at
Gundamuk; occupies Jellalabad; defence of Jellalabad; fighting with the
Ghilzais at Jugdulluk; ordered to rescue captives.

SALEH MAHOMED KHAN, arranges the escape of the captives.

SALISBURY, Lord.

SANGBUR.

SCINDE.

SCOTT, Major.

SCHUYLER, Mr Eugene, interviews Abdurrahman.

SEAH SUNG HEIGHTS, the.

SEH BABA.

SEISTAN, province of.

SHAFTO, Captain, killed at the Balla Hissar.

SHAGAI RIDGE, the.

SHAH BAGH, the.

SHAHBAZ KHAN.

SHAHJUI.

SHAHLEZ.

SHAKESPEAR, Sir Richmond.

SHEIKABAD.

SHELTON. Brigadier, arrives at Jellalabad; character; at Cabul; receives
contradictory orders from Macnaghten; in the Balla Hissar; takes the
Rikabashee fort; opposes the removal of the troops into the Balla Hissar;
attacks Bemaroo; commands the main body in the Retreat; his dogged
valour; a hostage.

SHER-DERWAZA HEIGHTS, the.

SHERE ALI, the Ameer, son of Dost Mahomed, accession and character;
refuses to receive a Resident; negotiations with Lord Lytton; cordial
reception of the Russians, refuses to receive Sir Neville Chamberlain;
death at Balkh; his mistakes.

SHERE ALI KHAN, Wali of Candahar; abdicates.

SHERPUR CANTONMENTS, the; description of; operations round; defence of;
durbar at; interview between Sir Donald Stewart and Abdurrahman at.

SHIKARPORE.

SHILGUR.

SHUMSHOODEEN, an Afghan leader.

SHUTARGURDAN PASS, the.

SIBI; retained by us.

SIKHS.

SIKH FEUDATORY STATES CONTINGENT.

SIKH REGIMENTS.

SINGIRI.

SKINNER, Captain, a hostage.

SLADE, at the Maiwand disaster.

SOMNATH, gates of.

SOOJAH-OOL-MOOLK, Shah; early career; intrigues; Lord Auckland determines
to restore him; his share in the expedition; replaced on the throne,
entry into Cabul; his position; with Macnaghten at Cabul; refuses to see
Dost Mahomed; goes to Jellalabad; his errors; disaffection towards him;
recommends the occupation of the Balla Hissar; stipulations with regard
to; remains in Cabul; letter to Sale at Jellalabad; murdered.

SOORKHAB.

SOUTER, Captain, escapes from the slaughter at Gundamuk.

SPENS, Captain of the 72d Highlanders, killed.

SPINGAWAI KOTUL, the, attack on, by Roberts.

STANHOPE, Mr, on the treaty of Gundamuk.

STEWART, Sir Donald; marches into Candahar; begins his march to Cabul;
battle of Ahmed Khel and Urzoo; continues his march to Cabul; relations
with Abdurrahman; in favour of keeping Candahar.

ST JOHN, Colonel.

STODDART, Colonel.

STOLIETOFF, defender of the Schipka pass, received by Shere Ali.

'STORMS AND SUNSHINE OF A SOLDIER'S LIFE,' by Colin Mackenzie.

STRATON, Captain.

SUKKUR.

SULIMAN MOUNTAINS, the.

SULTAN JAN.

SULTAN MAHMOUD, tomb of.

SUNG-I-NAWISHTA PASS, the.

SURKH KOTUL, the.

SUTLEJ RIVER, the.

SWAYNE, Major.

SYGHAN.

T.

TAGAO.

TAKHT-I-SHAH PEAK, the.

TASHKEND, Russians at; Shere Ali at; Abdurrahman at.

TEZEEN.

THAL-CHOTIALI.

THELWALL, Brigadier.

THOMSON, engineer to Keane.

TIMOUR, Prince, son of Shah Soojah, supported by Runjeet Singh; Soojah's
viceroy at Candahar; cruelty.

TIR-ANDAZ.

TODD, Major, political agent in Herat.

TOOTUNDURRAH FORT, Sale takes.

TREVOR, with Macnaghten at his death; murdered.

TROUP, Captain.

TUNGHEE TARIKI, gorge of, scene of slaughter.

TURNUK.

TURRAI.

TYTLER.

U.

UKTAR KHAN, a discontented Dooranee chief; Macnaghten offers reward for
his head.

URGUNDAB.

URGUNDEH.

URZOO, affair of.

V.

VAKEEL, the, obnoxious minister of Shah Soojah.

VICEROYS, _See_ LORDS W. BENTINCK, AUCKLAND, ELLENBOROUGH, NORTHBROOK,
LYTTON, and the MARQUIS OF RIPON.

VIKKUR.

W.

WADE, escorts Prince Timour by the Khyber route.

WALI MAHOMED, governor designate of Turkestan.

WARREN, evacuates the Commissariat fort.

WATSON, Colonel, in command of the Sikh Feudatory contingent.

WELLESLEY, the Marquis, criticism on Lord Auckland's decision.

WELLINGTON, Duke of, criticism on Lord Auckland's decision; on
Elphinstone's position at Cabul; on English troops v. hillmen.

WHITE, Major, of the 92d Highlanders, at the attack on Beni Hissar; in
the battle of Candahar.

WILD, Brigadier, attempts to force the Khyber pass.

WILLSHIRE, General, harassed in the Bolan pass; punishes Khelat.

WOLSELEY, Lord, against keeping Candahar.

WORSLEY, Colonel.

WYMER, Colonel, hard fighting with the Ghilzais.

Y.

YAHUJA KHAN.

YAKOUB KHAN, son of Shere Ali, released and made regent; intercourse with
Sir Sam Browne; question of his complicity in the Cavagnari massacre;
takes refuge in the English camp; a prisoner; the Viceroy's decision
against his return to power.

YAR MAHOMED, Shah Kamran's minister.

YERGATI.

Z.

ZAKARIAH KHAN, Yakoub's brother.

ZANDEH, captives carried to.

ZEMINDAWAR, country of.

ZIMMA, Abdurrahman and Sir Lepel Griffin at.

ZURMUT.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE END.

       *       *       *       *       *






Back to Full Books