Alaeddin and the Enchanted LampbyJohn Payne

Alaeddin should not come forth and that the lamp should not be
brought up from under the earth. Then he went his ways and
returned to his country Africa, woeful and despairing of his
hope.

So much for the enchanter and as for what came of Alaeddin, after
the earth closed over him, he fell to calling upon the Maugrabin,
whom he thought his uncle, to give him his hand, so he might come
forth the underground to the surface of the earth; but, when he
found that none returned him an answer, he was ware of the cheat
which the Maugrabin had put upon him and knew that he was none of
his uncle, but a liar and a sorcerer. Therewith he despaired of
his life and knew, to his woe, that there was no more going forth
for him upon the face of the earth; so he fell to weeping and
lamenting over that which had befallen him. Then, after a little,
he arose and went down, that he might see if God the Most High
had vouchsafed him a door whereby he might go forth; and he went
seeking right and left, but saw nought save darkness and four
walls shut upon him; for that the Maugrabin sorcerer had by his
enchantments locked all the doors and had even shut up the
garden, so he might leave him no door whereby he should come
forth upon the face of the earth and so hasten his death upon
him. Alaeddin's weeping redoubled and his lamentation waxed when
he saw all the doors shut and eke the garden, for that he thought
to solace himself with them [FN#259] a little; but he found them
locked, so he fell to crying out and weeping, as he whose hope is
cut off, and returning, sat down upon the steps of the stair
whereby he had entered the vault, weeping [FN#260] and wailing;
and indeed he had lost hope.

But it is a small matter for God (extolled be His perfection and
exalted be He) whenas He willeth a thing, to say to it "Be," and
it is; for that He createth relief out of the midst of stress; by
token that, when the Maugrabin enchanter sent Alaeddin down into
the vault, he gave him a ring and put it on his finger, saying,
"This ring will deliver thee from all stress, an thou be in
calamities or vicissitudes, and will remove from thee troubles;
yea, it will be thy helper whereassoever thou art;" and this was
by the foreordinance of God the Most High, so it might be the
means of Alaeddin's deliverance. So, as he sat weeping and
bewailing his case and indeed his hope was cut off of life and
despair was heavy upon him, he fell, of the excess of his
anguish, to wringing [FN#261] his hands, after the wont of the
woeful; then, raising them [to heaven], he made supplication to
God, saying, "I testify that there is no God but Thou alone, the
Mighty, the Powerful, the Conquering, the Giver of Life and
Death, [FN#262] Creator and Accomplisher [FN#263] of necessities,
Resolver of difficulties and perplexities and Dispeller
thereof, [FN#264] Thou my sufficiency, Thou the most excellent
Guardian, and I testify that Mohammed is Thy servant and Thine
apostle. O my God, I conjure Thee, by his [FN#265] glory with
Thee, deliver me from my extremity."

Whilst he was thus supplicating God and wringing his hands in the
excess of his affliction for that which had befallen him of
calamity, he chanced to rub upon the ring, and immediately,
behold, a genie [FN#266] rose up before him and said to him, "Here
am I; thy slave is before thee. Seek whatsoever thou wilt, for
that I am his slave who hath the ring in hand, the ring of my
lord." [FN#267] Alaeddin looked and saw a Marid, [FN#268] as he
were of the Jinn of our lord Solomon, standing before him, and
shuddered at his frightful aspect; but, when he heard the genie
say to him, "Seek whatsoever thou wilt, for that I am thy slave,
since the ring of my lord is on thy hand," he took heart and
bethought him of the Maugrabin's speech to him, whenas he gave
him the ring. So he rejoiced exceedingly and took courage and
said to him, "O slave of the lord of the ring, I will of thee
that thou bring me out upon the face of the earth." Hardly had he
made an end of that his speech when, behold, the earth opened and
he found himself without, at the door of the treasure, to wit,
upon the surface of the earth.

Now, he had been three days under the earth, sitting in the
treasure in the dark; so, when the light of day smote on his face
and the rays of the sun, he might not unclose his eyes, but took
to opening them little by little and shutting them again. till
they became stronger and grew used to the light and were cleared
of the darkness. Then, [FN#269] seeing himself upon the surface of
the earth, he rejoiced exceedingly, but marvelled to find himself
overagainst the entrance of the treasure, whereby he went down,
whenas the Maugrabin enchanter opened it; and now the stone was
shut down and the earth levelled, nor was there any sign therein
of a door. So he redoubled in wonderment and thought himself
otherwhere; nor was he assured that he was in the very place,
till he saw whereas they had kindled the fire of sticks and
brushwood and whereas the Maugrabin enchanter had made his
fumigations and conjurations. Then he turned right and left and
saw the gardens afar off and looked at the way and knew it for
that by which they had come. So he gave thanks to God the Most
High, who had brought him out on the earth's face and had
delivered him from death, after he had given up hope of life.
Then he arose and fared homeward, by the way which he knew, till
he came to the city and entering, betook himself to their house
and went in to his mother. When he saw her, he fell down before
her, of the greatness of the joy which possessed him for his
deliverance, and swooned away for the affright and the weariness
which he had suffered, more by token that he was weak with
hunger.

Now his mother had been woebegone since he left her and sat
wailing and weeping for him; so, when she saw him come in to her,
she rejoiced in him with an exceeding joy, but grief overwhelmed
her, whenas she saw him fall aswoon upon the earth. However, she
wasted no time in vain lamentation, but hastened to sprinkle
water on his face and sought of her neighbours somewhat of
perfumes, to which she made him smell. When he was a little
recovered, he prayed her bring him somewhat to eat, saying to
her, "O my mother, these three days past I have eaten nothing."
So she arose and setting before him that which she had ready,
said to him, " Rise, O my son, eat and restore thyself; and when
thou art rested, tell me what hath happened to thee and what
calamity hath befallen thee. I will not question thee now,
because thou art weary." So, [FN#270] when he had eaten and
drunken and had refreshed himself and was rested and restored, he
said to her, "Alack, mother mine, I have a sore grief against
thee in that thou leftest me to yonder accursed man, who strove
for my destruction. Indeed, he sought to kill me; nay, I saw
death face to face from that accursed wretch, whom thou deemedst
mine uncle, and but for God the Most High, who delivered me from
him, [I had perished]. Marry, both I and thou, O my mother,
suffered ourselves to be deluded by him after the measure of that
which the accursed promised to do with me of good and of the love
which he professed for me. Know, then, O my mother, that this man
is an accursed Maugrabin enchanter, a liar, a deceiver, an
impostor and a hypocrite; methinketh the devils that be under the
earth are not his match, may God put him to shame in every
book! [FN#271] Hear, O my mother, what this accursed did; nay, all
I shall tell thee is truth and soothfastness. Do but see the
villain's duplicity; bethink thee of the promises he made me that
he would do me all manner of good [FN#272] and the love he
professed to me, and how he did all this that he might accomplish
his purpose; nay, his intent was to kill me, and praised be God
for my deliverance! Hearken, O my mother, and learn what this
accursed one did."

Then he told her all that had befallen him from the time of his
leaving her, weeping the while for excess of joy; how the
Maugrabin brought him to the hill, wherein was the treasure, and
how he conjured and fumigated.  "And indeed. O my mother," said
he, "there overcame me exceeding fear, whenas the hill clove in
sunder and the earth opened before me by his enchantments; and I
quaked with terror at the voice of the thunder which I heard and
the darkness which befell of his spells and fumigations, and of
my dismay at these portents, I would have fled. When he saw me
offer to flee, he reviled me and smote me, dealing me a buffet
which caused me swoon for pain [FN#273] but, inasmuch as the
treasure was opened and he could not go down into it himself,
seeing he had opened it by my means and that it was in name and
not for him, he knew, being a foul sorcerer, that it might [only]
be achieved through me and that this adventure was [reserved] for
me. [FN#274] Accordingly [FN#275] he applied himself to make his
peace with me, that he might send me down into the treasure, now
it was opened, and attain his object by my means; and when he
sent me down, he gave me a ring, which he had on his hand, and
put it on my finger. So I descended into the treasure and found
four chambers, all full of gold and silver and the like; but this
all was nothing and the accursed one charged me take nought
thereof. Thence I entered a magnificent garden, [FN#276] all full
of high trees, whose fruits ravished the wits, O my mother, for
that they were all of various-coloured crystal, [FN#277] and I
fared on till I came to the pavilion [FN#278] wherein was this
lamp; whereupon I took it forthright and quenching it, poured out
that which was therein."

[So saying,] he pulled out the lamp from his sleeve and showed it
to his mother. Moreover, he showed her the jewels which he had
brought from the garden. Now there were two great purses [FN#279]
full of these jewels, whereof not one was to be found with the
kings of mankind; and Alaeddin knew not their value, but thought
that they were glass or crystal. "Then, O my mother," continued
he, "after I had fetched the lamp and had gone forth [the garden]
and came to the door of the treasure, I cried out to the accursed
Maugrabin, who feigned himself my uncle, to give me his hand and
pull me up, for I was laden with things which weighed me down, so
that it was not possible for me to mount alone. However, he would
not give me his hand, but said to me, 'Reach me the lamp that is
with thee, and after I will give thee my hand and pull thee up.'
I, seeing that I had put the lamp within my sleeve and the purses
atop [FN#280] of it, could not reach it to give it to him and said
to him, 'O my-uncle, I cannot give thee the lamp. When I come up,
I will give it to thee.' But he would not help me up; nay, he
would e'en have the lamp, and his intent was to take it from me
and turn back the earth over me and destroy me, even as he did
with me in the end. This, then, O my mother, was what befell me
from that foul wizard." And he told her all that had passed
between them from first to last and fell to reviling the
Maugrabin with all rancour and heat of heart, saying, "Out on
this accursed one, this foul sorcerer, this hard-hearted
oppressor, this inhuman, perfidious, hypocritical villain,
lacking [FN#281] all mercy and ruth!"

When [FN#282] Alaeddin's mother heard her son's speech and that
which the accursed Maugrabin did with him, she said to him, "Yea,
verily, O my son, he is a misbeliever and a hypocrite, who
destroyeth folk with his sorcery; but glory [FN#283] to God the
Most High, who hath delivered thee from the perfidy and guile of
this accursed sorcerer, of whom I thought that he was in very
deed thine uncle." Now, Alaeddin had passed three days without
sleep and found himself drowsy; so he [withdrew to his chamber
and] slept. His mother did likewise and Alaeddin ceased not to
sleep till next day, [FN#284] near noontide, when he awoke and
immediately sought somewhat to eat, for that he was anhungred;
and his mother said to him, "O my son, I have nought to give thee
to eat, for that all I had by me thou atest yesterday. But wait
awhile; I have here a little yarn by me and I am going down to
the market, so I may sell it and buy thee withal somewhat thou
mayst eat." "O my mother," rejoined Alaeddin, "keep the yarn and
sell it not; but give me the lamp which I brought home, so I may
arise and sell it and with its price buy somewhat we may eat.
Methinketh it will fetch more than the yarn." So she arose and
fetched the lamp; but, finding it exceeding dirty, she said to
him, "O my son, this lamp is dirty, and if we wash it and furbish
it, it will sell for a better price." Accordingly she took a
little sand and fell to scouring the lamp withal; but scarce had
she begun to rub it when there appeared to her one of the Jinn,
foul of favour and monstrous of make as he were of the giants,
and said to her, "Say what thou wilt of me. Here am I, thy slave
and the slave of whoso hath in his hand the lamp; and not I
alone, but all the slaves of the wonderful lamp that is in thy
hand." When she saw his frightful aspect, she trembled and fear
get hold upon her and her tongue was tied, nor could she return
an answer, for that she was not used to look upon apparitions
like unto this; so [FN#285] she fell down aswoon of her terror.

Now Alaeddin her son was standing afar off and he had seen the
slave of the ring which he had rubbed in the treasure; so, when
he heard the genie's speech to his mother, he hastened to take
the lamp from her hand and said to him, "O slave of the lamp, I
am hungry; my will is that thou bring me somewhat I may eat, and
be it somewhat good past conceit." [FN#286] The genie was absent
the twinkling of an eye and [returning,] brought him a great
costly tray of sheer silver, whereon were twelve platters of
various kinds and colours [FN#287] of rich meats and two silver
cups and two flagons [FN#288] of clarified old wine and bread
whiter than snow; all which he set before him and disappeared. So
Alaeddin arose and sprinkled rosewater on his mother's face and
made her smell to strong [FN#289] perfumes; whereupon she revived
and he said to her, "Rise, O my mother, so we may eat of this
food that God the Most High hath vouchsafed us." [FN#290] When she
saw the great silver tray, she marvelled and said to Alaeddin, "O
my son, who is the generous, the bountiful one that hath sought
out our hunger [FN#291] and our poverty? Indeed, we are beholden
to him. [FN#292] Apparently the Sultan hath heard of our case and
our wretchedness and hath sent us this tray." "O my mother,"
answered Alaeddin, "this is no time for questioning; rise, so we
may eat, for we are anhungred."

So they arose and sitting down to the tray, proceeded to eat,
whilst Alaeddin's mother tasted food such as she had never in all
her life eaten. And they ate diligently [FN#293] with all
appetite, for stress of hunger, more by token that the food [was
such as] is given to kings, nor knew they if the tray were
precious or not, for that never in their lives had they seen the
like of these things. When they had made an end of eating and
were full (and there was left them, over and above what sufficed
them, [enough] for the evening-meal and for the next day also),
they arose and washing their hands, sat down to talk; whereupon
Alaeddin's mother turned to her son and said to him, "O my son,
tell me what befell of [FN#294] the genie, now that, praised be
God, we have eaten of His bounty and are satisfied and thou hast
no pretext for saying to me, 'I am anhungred.'" So he told her
all that had passed between himself and the genie, whenas she
fell down aswoon of her affright; whereat exceeding wonderment
took her and she said to him, "It is true, then, [FN#295] that the
Jinn appear to the sons of Adam, though I, O my son, in all my
days, I have never seen them, and methinketh this is he who
delivered thee, whenas thou west in the treasure." "Nay, O my
mother," answered he, "this was not he; he who appeared to thee
is the slave of the lamp." "How so, [FN#296] O my son?" asked she;
and he said, "This slave is other of make than that. That was the
servant of the ring and this thou sawest is the slave of the lamp
which was in thy hand." When [FN#297] his mother heard this,
"Well, well!" cried she. "Then the accursed who appeared to me
and came nigh to kill me for affright is of the lamp?" "Ay is
he," answered Alaeddin; and she said to him, "I conjure thee, O
my son, by the milk thou suckedst of me, that thou cast away from
thee both lamp and ring, for that they will be to us a cause of
exceeding fear and I could not endure to see them [FN#298] a
second time; nay, their commerce is forbidden unto us, for that
the prophet (whom God bless and keep) warneth us against
them." [FN#299] "O my mother," answered Alaeddin, "thy speech is
on my head and eyes; [FN#300] but, as for this that thou sayest,
it may not be that I should cast away either the lamp or the
ring; nay, thou seest that which it [FN#301] did with us of good,
whenas we were anhungred, and know, O my mother, that the lying
Maugrabin enchanter, what time I went down into the treasure,
sought nought of gold nor of silver, whereof the four places were
full, but charged me bring him the lamp and that only, for that
he knew the greatness of its virtues; [FN#302] and except he knew
it to be exceeding of might, he had not toiled and travailed and
come from his land to this in quest of it, nor had he shut the
treasure on me, whenas he failed of the lamp, seeing I gave it
him not. Wherefore, O my mother, it behoveth us keep this lamp
and guard it with all care, for that this is our support and this
it is shall enrich us; and it behoveth us show it not unto any.
On like wise, as for the ring, it may not be that I should put it
off from my finger, forasmuch as, but for this ring, thou hadst
not seen me again on life; nay, I had died under the earth within
the treasure; so how can I put it off from my hand and who
knoweth what may happen to me in time to come of error or
calamity or shift of the shifts of mischance, from which the ring
might deliver me? However, of regard for thy wish, I will lay up
the lamp and let thee not see it henceforth." When his mother
heard his words and pondered them, she saw them to be just and
true and said to him, "O my son, do what thou wilt. For my part,
I wish never to see them nor ever again to behold that loathsome
aspect [FN#303] which I saw [but now]."

Alaeddin [FN#304] and his mother abode two days eating of the food
which the genie had brought, and when it was finished and he knew
that there was left them nothing to eat, he arose and taking a
platter of those which the slave had brought on the tray (now
they were of fine gold, but Alaeddin knew it not) went with it to
the market, where a Jew, a man viler than devils themselves,
accosted [FN#305] him and he gave him the platter. When the Jew
saw it, he took Alaeddin aside, so none might see him, and
examining the platter, found it of fine gold, [FN#306] but knew
not if Alaeddin was ware of its worth or if he was ignorant
thereof; so he said to him, "How much, O my lord, for this
platter?" And Alaeddin answered him, saying, "Thou knowest how
much it is worth." The Jew was perplexed how much he should give
Alaeddin for the platter, by reason of his having made him an
adroit answer, and bethought himself to give him little, but
feared lest he should be aware of its value and debated with
himself if he should give him much. Then said he in himself,
"Most like he knoweth not its value;" so he brought out of his
pocket a gold diner and gave it to him. When Alaeddin saw the
diner in his hand, he took it and went off in haste, whereby the
Jew knew that the lad was unaware of the value of the plate and
repented him sore that he had given him a gold diner and not a
carat of three-score: [FN#307]

Meanwhile Alaeddin tarried not, but went forthright to the baker
and bought of him bread and changed the diner; then, returning to
his mother, he gave her the bread and the rest of the money and
said to her, "O my mother, go and buy us what we need." So she
arose and going to the market, bought all that they needed and
they ate and were cheered. Then, whenassoever the price of a
platter was spent, Alaeddin would take another and carry it to
the Jew; on which wise the accursed Jew bought them all of him
for a small matter and would fain also have reduced the price;
but, since he had given him a diner the first time, he feared to
offer him less, lest the lad should go and sell to
another [FN#308] and he lose that excessive profit. Accordingly,
Alaeddin ceased not to sell him platter after platter till he had
sold them all and there was left him only the tray whereon they
had been; then, for that it was big and heavy, he went and
fetched the Jew to the house and brought out to him the tray.
When he saw it and noted its bigness, he gave Alaeddin ten
diners, which he took, and the Jew went his way.

Alaeddin and his mother lived upon the ten diners till they came
to an end; then he arose and bringing out the lamp, rubbed it,
whereupon the slave of the lamp, to wit, the genie whom he had
seen before, appeared to him and [FN#309] said to him, "Seek what
thou wilt, O my lord, for that I am thy slave and the slave of
whoso hath with him the lamp." Quoth Alaeddin, "It is my will
that thou bring me a tray of food like unto that which thou
broughtest me erewhen, for that I am hungry;" and the slave
brought him, in the twinkling of an eye, a tray like unto that
which he had brought him before, and on it twelve magnificent
platters full of rich meats, together with flagons [FN#310] of
clarified wine and bread of the finest. Now Alaeddin's mother,
when she knew that her son was minded to rub the lamp, had gone
out, so she might not see the genie again; but, after a little,
she came in to him and seeing the tray full of silver platters,
whilst the whole house reeked with the fragrance of the rich
meats, marvelled and rejoiced; and Alaeddin said to her, "O my
mother, thou badest me throw away the lamp. See now its uses." "O
my son," answered she, "may God prosper him; [FN#311] but fain
would I not see him." Then they sat down to the tray and ate and
drank till they were satisfied, laying up that which remained
with them against the morrow.

Then, when that which was with them of food was finished,
Alaeddin arose and taking one of the platters under his clothes,
went in quest of the Jew, so he might sell it to him; but, as
chance willed it, he passed by the shop of a goldsmith, an
honest, pious man, who feared God. When the latter saw Alaeddin,
he accosted him and said to him, "O my son, what wilt thou? This
many a time have I seen thee pass hereby and betake thyself to
such an one, a Jew, and I have seen thee give him certain things.
Nay, methinketh even now thou hast somewhat with thee and art
seeking him, so thou mayst sell it to him. But thou knowest not,
O my son, that the good of the Muslims, believers in the unity of
God the Most High, is lawful spoil in the eyes of Jews; nay, they
still cheat the Muslims and especially this accursed one with
whom thou dealest and into whose hands thou hast fallen.
Wherefore, O my son, an thou have with thee aught thou wouldst
sell, show it to me and fear nothing, for that, by the truth of
God the Most High, I will give thee its price." Accordingly,
Alaeddin brought out the platter to the old man, who took it and
weighing it in his scales, said to him, "Was it the like of this
thou usest to sell to the Jew?" "Ay," replied Alaeddin, "its like
and its brother." "And how much," asked the goldsmith, "useth he
to give thee to its price?" And Alaeddin said, "He useth to give
me a diner."

When [FN#312] the goldsmith heard this, "Out on this accursed
one," cried he, "who fleeceth the servants of God the Most High!"
Then he looked at Alaeddin and said to him, "O my son, this Jew
is a cheat, who hath cheated thee and laughed at thee, for that
the silver of this thy platter is pure and fine; and I have
weighed it and find its worth threescore diners and ten; so, an
it please thee take its price, take [it]." Accordingly, he
counted out to him seventy diners and he took them and thanked
him for his kindness, in that he had shown him the Jew's
trickery. Thenceforward, whenassoever the price of one platter
was spent, he would carry another to the old goldsmith, and on
this wise he and his mother increased in substance; but they
ceased not to live at their sufficiency, [FN#313] midwise [betwixt
rich and poor], [FN#314] without excessive spending [FN#315] or
squandering. As for Alaeddin, he left idleness and the commerce
of striplings and took to consorting with grown men; [FN#316] nay,
he would go every day to the market of the merchants and sit with
the great and the small of them and question of the ways and
fashions of commerce and the prices of articles of
merchandise [FN#317] and otherwhat. He used also to go to the
market of the goldsmiths and the market of the jewellers, and
there he would sit and look upon the different kinds of jewels
and see them bought and sold; whereby he became aware that the
fruits of the trees, wherewith he had filled the purses, [FN#318]
whenas he was in the treasure, were neither glass nor crystal,
but jewels, and knew that he had happened upon great wealth, such
as kings might nowise compass. Moreover, he noted all the jewels
that were in the jewellers' market, but saw not [among] the
biggest [of them] one to match with the smallest of those he had
at home.

He ceased not to go daily to the market of the jewellers and to
clap up acquaintance with the folk, making friends with them and
questioning them of buying and selling and giving and taking and
dear and cheap, till, one day of the days, he arose in the
morning and donning his clothes, went forth, intending, as of
wont, for the jewellers' market; but, as he went, he heard the
crier proclaiming aloud on this wise, "By commandment of the Lord
of Beneficence, the king of the age and monarch of the time and
the tide, let all the folk shut their shops and stores and enter
their houses, for that the Lady Bedrulbudour, daughter of the
Sultan, purposeth to go to the bath, and whoso transgresseth the
commandment, his punishment shall be death and his blood be on
his own head." [FN#319] When Alaeddin heard this proclamation, he
longed to look upon the Sultan's daughter and said in himself,
"All the folk talk of her grace and goodliness, and the uttermost
of my desire is to see her." So [FN#320] he cast about for a
device how he might contrive to see the Lady Bedrulbudour and
him-seemed he were best stand behind the door of the bath, that
he might see her face, as she entered. Accordingly he betook
himself to the bath, awhile in advance, and posted himself behind
the door, whereas none of the folk might see him.

Presently, the Sultan's daughter came forth and went round about
the city and its thoroughfares and diverted herself by viewing
it; then she repaired to the bath and when she came thither, she
lifted her face-veil, as she entered; whereupon her face shone
out, as it were the resplendent sun or a precious pearl, and she
was as saith of her one of her describers:

Who sprinkled the kohl of enchantment upon her eyes
     And gathered the bloom of the rose from her cheeks,
fruit-wise?
And who was it let down the curtained night of her hair
     And eke through its glooms made the light of her forehead
rise?

When she raised the veil from her face and Alaeddin saw her, he
said, "Verily, her fashion glorifieth the Great Creator and
extolled be the perfection of Him who made her and graced her
with this beauty and goodliness!" And his back was cloven in
sunder, [FN#321] when he saw her; his thought was confounded and
his understanding [FN#322] dazed and the love of her gat hold upon
his whole heart; so he turned back and returning home, went in to
his mother, like one distraught. She bespoke him and he answered
her neither yea nor nay; then she brought him the morning-meal,
as he abode on this wise, and said to him, "O my son, what hath
betided thee? Doth there ail thee aught? Tell me what hath
befallen thee, for that, against thy wont, I bespeak thee and
thou answerest me not."

Now Alaeddin had been used to think that women were all like his
mother and he had heard of the beauty of the Lady Bedrulbudour,
daughter of the Sultan, but had not known what beauty and grace
were; so he turned to his mother and said to her, "Leave me;" but
she was instant with him to come and eat. Accordingly, he came
forward and ate a little; then, rising, he threw himself on his
bed and lay musing till break of morn; and on this wise he abode
all next day. His mother was perplexed at his case, unknowing
what had befallen him, and bethought herself that belike he was
sick; so she came up to him and questioned him, saying, "O my
son, an thou feel aught of pain or otherwhat, tell me, that I may
go fetch thee a physician, more by token there is presently in
the city a physician from the land of the Arabs, whom the Sultan
hath sent to bring hither, and report saith of him that he is
exceeding skilful; so [tell me] if thou art sick, that I may go
and call him to thee."

When [FN#323] Alaeddin heard his mother offer to fetch him the
physician, he said to her, "O my mother, I am well and not sick,
but I had thought that women were all like unto thee. However,
yesterday, I saw the Lady Bedrulbudour, the Sultan's daughter, as
she went to the bath;" and he told her all that had happened to
him, adding, "And most like thou heardest the crier proclaiming
that none should open his shop nor stand in the road, so the Lady
Bedrulbudour might pass to the bath; but I saw her even as she
is, for that, when she came to the door of the bath, she lifted
her veil, and when I noted her favour and viewed that noble form
of hers, there befell me, O my mother, a passion of yearning for
love of her and desire of her [FN#324] usurped mine every part;
nor can I ever more have ease, except I get her, and I purpose,
therefore, to demand her of the Sultan her father in the way of
law and righteousness."

When Alaeddin's mother heard her son's speech, she thought little
of his wit and said to him, "O my son, the name of God encompass
thee! Meseemeth thou hast lost thy wit; return to thy
senses, [FN#325] O my son, and be not like the madmen!" "Nay, O my
mother," replied he, "I have not lost my wits nor am I mad; and
this thy speech shall not change that which is in my mind, nor is
rest possible to me except I get the darling of my heart, the
lovely Lady Bedrulbudour. And my intent is to demand her of her
father the Sultan." So she said to him, "O my son, my life upon
thee, speak not thus, lest one hear thee and say of thee that
thou art mad. Put away from thee this extravagance: [FN#326] who
shall undertake an affair like this and demand it of the Sultan?
Meknoweth not how thou wilt do to make this request of the
Sultan, and if thou speak sooth, [FN#327] by whom wilt thou make
it?" "O my mother," rejoined Alaeddin, "by whom [should I make] a
request like this, when thou art at hand, and whom have I
trustier [FN#328] than thyself? Wherefore my intent is that thou
shalt make this request for me." "O my son," quoth she, "God
deliver me from this! What, have I lost my wits like thee? Put
away this thought from thy mind and bethink thee who thou art, O
my son,--the son of a tailor, the poorest and least of the
tailors in this city, and I also am thy mother and my folk are
exceeding poor; so how wilt thou dare to demand the Sultan's
daughter, whom her father would not vouchsafe to marry with
kings' sons and Sultans, except they were his peers in puissance
and rank and noblesse; nay, were they one degree less than he, he
would not give them his daughter."

Alaeddin [FN#329] waited till his mother had made an end of her
speech and said to her, "O my mother, all that thou thinkest I
know; marry, I know full well that I am the son of poor folk, nor
may all this thy talk anywise avail to move me from my purpose;
but I beseech thee, an I be thy very son and thou love me, do me
this kindness; else wilt thou lose me, for death hasteneth upon
me, an I attain not my wish of the beloved of my heart. In any
case, O my mother, I am thy son." When his mother heard his
speech, she wept of her concern for him and said to him, "Yes, O
my son, I am thy mother and thou art my son and the darling of my
heart; [FN#330] I have none other than thee and the extreme of my
desire is to rejoice in thee and marry thee. So, an thou wilt, I
will seek thee a bride of our own rank. But suppose [I do this],
they [FN#331] [will] ask at once an thou have craft or land or
trade or garden, so thou mayst live, and what shall I answer them
" And if I cannot answer poor folk like ourselves, how, O my son,
shall I dare to seek the King's daughter of China, who hath none
before him and none after him? Wherefore do thou ponder this
matter in thine understanding. And who seeketh her? The son of a
tailor. [FN#332] Indeed, I know that, an I speak of this, it will
but be for the increase of our ill luck, for that this affair
will bring us in great danger with the Sultan and belike there
will be death therein for thee and for me. As for me, how can I
adventure upon this danger and this effrontery? Moreover, O my
son, on what wise shall I demand thee his daughter of the Sultan
and how shall I avail to go in to him? Nay, if they question me,
what shall I answer them? Most like they will deem me a madwoman.
And suppose I gain admission to the presence, what shall I take
by way of offering to the Sultan's highness? It [FN#333] is true,
O my son, that the Sultan is clement and rejecteth none that
cometh to him for protection or craveth a boon of him, for that
he is bountiful and beneficent unto all, great and small; [FN#334]
but he bestoweth his favours upon those who are deserving thereof
or who have done some feat of arms before him or have wrought for
the service or defence of the realm; and thou, O my son, tell me,
what hast thou done for [FN#335] the Sultan or the realm, that
thou shouldst merit of him this boon? Again, this that thou
cravest is beyond thy condition; [FN#336] so it cannot be that the
king will grant thee that which thou seekest. Moreover, whoso
presenteth himself before the Sultan and craveth favours of him,
it behoveth him take in his hand somewhat that sorteth with the
royal dignity; and as I said to thee, how canst thou presume to
present thyself before the Sultan and seek of him his daughter,
without aught thou mayst proffer him of that which sorteth with
his rank?"

"O my mother," replied Alaeddin, "thou speakest justly and
deemest that which is true, [FN#337] and it behoveth me consider
all that whereof thou mindest me; but, O my mother, the love of
the Sultan's daughter, the Lady Bedrulbudour, hath entered into
the innermost of my heart; and there can be no rest for me,
except I obtain her. Moreover, thou mindest me of somewhat I had
forgotten, and that a thing which emboldeneth me to seek of him
his daughter by thee. Thou sayst, O my mother, that I have no
gift to present to the Sultan, according to the wont of the folk,
whilst in fact I have by me a gift and an offering, the like
whereof methinketh no king ever possessed, no, nor aught to match
therewith; for [FN#338] thou must know, O my mother, that the
fruits, which I brought in the purses [FN#339] from the treasure
and which I deemed glass or crystal, are very jewels, methinketh
all the kings of the world may not compass the least of them, and
I, of my companying with the jewellers, know that they are
precious stones. Wherefore, an thou please, have the goodness to
rise and bring me such a China dish which we have by us, [FN#340]
that I may fill it with these jewels, and thou shalt take it as a
present to the Sultan. By this means I am assured that the thing
will be easy to thee, and do thou stand before the Sultan and
seek of him my desire; but, O my mother, an thou refuse to
further me with thine endeavour for the attainment of my wish of
the Lady Bedrulbudour, know that I am a dead man. Be not
concerned for the gift, for these be exceeding precious jewels,
and know, O my mother, that I have gone many a time to the market
of the jewellers and have seen them sell jewels, that had not an
hundredth part [FN#341] of the beauty of these of ours, at
exceeding high prices such as man's wit cannot conceive. When,
therefore, I saw this, I said [in myself], 'Verily, the jewels
that are with us are exceeding precious.' So now, O my mother,
arise, as I bade thee, and fetch me the China dish whereof I
bespoke thee, that we may range of these jewels therein and see
how they show."

Accordingly, she arose and brought the China dish, saying in
herself, "Let us see if my son's speech be true concerning these
jewels or not." So she set the dish before Alaeddin and he
brought out jewels of all kinds from the purses and proceeded to
range them in the dish till he filled it. When it was full, his
mother looked at the dish, but could not gaze fixedly thereon,
for the radiance of the jewels and their lustre and the excess of
their flashing; so she shut her eyes and her wit was confounded
at them; yet was she not certified that their value was in very
deed so great as her son had said, but bethought her that his
speech might be true in that their like was not found with kings.
Then Alaeddin turned to her and said, "See, O my mother, this is
a magnificent present for the Sultan and I am assured that thou
wilt get of him exceeding honour and that he will receive thee
with all consideration. And now, O my mother, there remaineth to
thee no excuse; so be good enough [FN#342] to take this dish and
go with it to the palace."


"O my son," replied she, " true it is that the present is
exceedingly costly and precious and as thou sayest, none hath the
like thereof; but who shall dare to come forward and seek of the
Sultan his daughter Bedrulbudour? Nay, I dare not adventure
myself and say to him, 'I want thy daughter,' whenas he asketh
me, 'What wouldst thou?' Marry, O my son,, my tongue will be
tied. And grant that Allah make [the thing] possible and I take
courage and say to him, 'I desire to ally myself to thee by
[marrying] thy daughter the Lady Bedrulbudour with my son
Alaeddin,' they will straightway deem me mad and will put me out
with ignominy and reproach; nay, I need not tell thee that by
this I shall fall into danger of death, and not I only, but thou
also. Withal, O my son, of regard for thy wish, needs must I take
courage and go; but, O my son, if the King receive me and honour
me for the gift's sake and I seek of him that which thou wilt
in [FN#343] the matter of marrying his daughter and he ask me,
after the wont of the folk, what are thy possessions and thy
revenues, what shall I say to him? And most like, O my son, he
will ask me of this ere he ask me of thyself." And Alaeddin said
to her, "Nay, it cannot be that the Sultan will ask this, whenas
he seeth the jewels and their magnificence, and it booteth not to
think of a thing that will not happen. Do thou but rise and seek
me his daughter of him and proffer him these jewels and sit not
magnifying the affair in thy thought beforehand. Moreover, O my
mother, thou knowest of the lamp which is with me and which
presently provideth for our livelihood; [FN#344] nay, all that I
seek of it it will bring me, and I trust by its means I shall
know how to answer the Sultan, an he ask me of this."

They abode in talk of the matter all that night and when the
morning morrowed, Alaeddin's mother arose and fortified her
heart, more by token that her son expounded to her somewhat of
the properties of the lamp and its uses, in that it would bring
them all they sought. But, when he saw that she heartened herself
for that which he set forth to her of its virtues, he feared lest
she should talk of this to the folk, so he said to her, " O my
mother, beware lest thou bespeak any of the lamp and its uses,
for that this is our fortune; be careful [FN#345] and exceed not
in speech thereof to any one, lest we lose it and lose this our
present prosperity, for that it is from it." [FN#346] "Have no
fear for that, O my son," answered she and rising, took the dish
wherein were the jewels and wrapping it in a fine handkerchief,
went forth betimes, so she might reach the Divan and enter, ere
it became crowded. When she came to the palace, the Divan was not
yet assembled [FN#347] and she saw the Vizier and certain of the
chiefs of the state entering the presence-chamber. After a while,
the Divan being complete with the Viziers and the chiefs of the
state and officers and Amirs and grandees, the Sultan appeared
and the Viziers and other the officials and notables ranged
themselves before him, whilst he sat down on the throne of his
kingship and all who were present in the Divan stood before him,
with hands clasped behind them, [FN#348] awaiting his commandment
to sit. So he bade them be seated and they all sat down, each in
his several room; then the petitioners [FN#349] presented
themselves before the Sultan and each affair was decided in its
course, [FN#350] till the Divan came to an end, when the King rose
and entered the palace and each went his way.

As [FN#351] for Alaeddin's mother, having come before all, she
found room to enter, but withal none bespoke her, so he should
bring her in before the Sultan; wherefore she ceased not standing
till the Divan broke up and the Sultan rose and entered the
palace and all went their ways. When she saw the Sultan rise from
his throne and enter the harem, she took her way homeward and
returning on her steps, entered her house. Alaeddin, seeing her
with the dish in her hand, knew that most like some mischance had
betided her, but cared not to question her till she entered and
setting down the dish, told him what had passed and finally said
to him, "God be praised, O my son, I mustered courage to find
myself a place in the Divan, albeit I could not win to speak with
the Sultan to day; but to-morrow, an it please God the Most High,
I will bespeak him. To-day there were many other folk, like
myself, unable to get speech of the Sultan; but be easy, O my
son; to-morrow I will without fail bespeak him on thy behalf, and
what happened not shall happen." When Alaeddin heard his mother's
words, he rejoiced with an exceeding joy, albeit, of the excess
of his love and longing for the Lady Bedrulbudour, he had looked
for the matter to be accomplished then and there; nevertheless,
he used patience.

They slept that night and on the morrow Alaeddin's mother arose
and went with the dish to the Sultan's Divan, but found it
closed; so she asked the folk and they said to her, "The Sultan
holdeth a Divan but thrice a week;" wherefore she was
compelled [FN#352] to return home. Then she proceeded to go every
day, and whenas she found the Divan open, she would stand before
the door, [FN#353] till it broke up, when she would return home;
and whiles she went and found the Divan closed. [FN#354] On this
wise she abode a week's space [FN#355] and the Sultan saw her at
each Divan; so, when she went on the last day [of the week] and
stood, according to her wont, before the Divan, till it was
ended, but could not muster courage to enter [FN#356] or say
aught, the Sultan arose and entering the harem, turned to his
chief Vizier, who was with him, and said to him, " O Vizier,
these six or seven days [FN#357] past I have seen yonder old woman
come hither at every Divan and I note that she still carrieth
somewhat under her veil. [FN#358] Hast thou any knowledge of her,
O Vizier, and knowest thou what is her want?" "O our lord the
Sultan," replied the Vizier, "verily women are little of wit; and
most like this woman cometh to complain to thee of her husband or
one of her folk," The Sultan was not content with the Vizier's
reply, but bade him, an she came again to the Divan, bring her
before him forthright; [FN#359] whereupon the Vizier laid his hand
on his head and answered, "Hearkening and obedience, O our lord
the Sultan."

Meanwhile, [FN#360] Alaeddin's mother, albeit she was grown
exceeding weary and dejected, yet made light of all weariness,
for her son's sake, and continued, as of her wont, to go every
court-day and stand in the Divan before the Sultan. [FN#361]
Accordingly, one day of the days, she went to the Divan, as of
her wont, and stood before the Sultan; and when he saw her, he
called his Vizier and said to him, "Yonder is the woman of whom I
bespoke thee yesterday; bring her now before me, so I may see
what her suit is and accomplish unto her her occasion." So the
Vizier arose forthright and let bring Alaeddin's mother in before
the Sultan. When she came into the latter's presence, she made
her obeisance to him and did him reverence, wishing him glory and
continuance and eternity of prosperity and kissing the ground
before him. Then said he to her, "O woman, I see thee come every
day to the Divan and thou speakest not of aught. Tell me an thou
have a want, that I may accomplish it unto thee;" whereupon she
kissed the earth a second time and called down blessings upon
him, then answered, "Ay, O King of the Age, as thy head liveth, I
have indeed a want; but before all things do thou give me thine
assurance, [FN#362] so I may make bold to prefer my suit to the
hearing of our lord the Sultan, for that belike Thy Grace will
find it a strange one."

The Sultan, that he might learn what her suit was and for that he
was of his nature exceeding clement, gave her his assurance and
bidding all who were with him go out forthright, abode alone
[with her], he and the Grand Vizier. Then he turned to her and
said, "Tell me thy suit, and the assurance [FN#363] of God the
Most High be upon thee." Quoth she, "O King of the Age, I wish
thy pardon also." And he said to her, "God pardon thee!" [FN#364]
Then said she to him, "O our lord the Sultan, I have a son, whose
name is Alaeddin, and one day of the days he heard the crier
proclaim that none should open his shop nor show himself in the
thoroughfares of the city, [FN#365] for that the Lady
Bedrulbudour, the daughter of our lord the Sultan, was going to
the bath. When my son heard this, he wished. to see her; so he
hid himself in a place, whence he might see her well, and this
was behind the door of the bath. Accordingly, when she came up,
he saw her and viewed her well, beyond his wish; and from that
time till now, O King of the Age, life hath not been pleasant to
him [FN#366] and he will e'en have me seek her of Thy
Grace, [FN#367] so thou mayst marry her with him, and I cannot do
away this conceit from his wit, for that the love of her hath
gotten possession of his vitals, so that he saith to me, 'Know, O
mother mine, that, except I attain my desire, assuredly I am a
dead man.' Wherefore I crave Thy Grace's clemency and hope that
thou wilt pardon me and my son this effrontery neither be wroth
with us therefor."

When the King heard her story, he fell a-laughing, of his
clemency, [FN#368] and asked her, "What is that thou hast with
thee and what is that bundle?" [FN#369] Whereupon she, seeing that
he was not angered at her words, but laughed, opened the
handkerchief forthright and proffered him the dish of jewels.
When the Sultan saw the jewels (and indeed, whenas she raised the
handkerchief from them, the Divan became as it were all illumined
with lamp-clusters and candlesticks), he was amazed and
confounded at their radiance and fell a-marvelling at their
lustre and bigness and beauty; and [FN#370] he said, "Never saw I
the like of these jewels for beauty and bigness and perfection,
nor methinketh is one of them found in my treasuries." Then he
turned to his Vizier and said to him, "How sayst thou, O Vizier?
Sawest thou ever in thy life the like of these magnificent
jewels?" "Never, O our lord the Sultan," replied the Vizier,
"nor, methinketh, is the least of those which be here found in
the treasuries of our lord the King." Quoth the Sultan, "Doth not
he who giveth me these jewels deserve to be bridegroom to my
daughter Bedrulbudour? Marry, by what I see, meseemeth none is
worthier of her than he."

When the Vizier heard the Sultan's words, his tongue was tied for
despite and he was overcome with exceeding chagrin, forasmuch as
the King had promised him that he would marry his daughter to his
son; so, after a little, he said to him, "O King of the age, Thy
Grace condescended to promise me [FN#371] that the Lady
Bedrulbudour should be my son's; wherefore it behoveth thine
exalted highness appoint a delay of three months, [FN#372] and God
willing, my son's present shall be greater than this." The King,
for all he knew that this was a thing whereto the Vizier might
not avail, no, nor the greatest King, [FN#373] nevertheless
exercised his clemency [FN#374] and granted him the delay he
sought; then, turning to the old woman, he said to her, "Go to
thy son and tell him I give him [my] word that my daughter shall
be in his name; [FN#375] but needs must I take order for her
equipment; [FN#376] wherefore it behoveth him grant us a delay of
three months."

Alaeddin's mother took the answer and thanked the Sultan and
prayed for him, then went forth and fared homeward in haste,
flying of her joy, till she came to the house and entered. Her
son saw her laughing-faced and foreboded good news; more by token
that she returned forthright and tarried not, as on each day
past, neither brought back the dish. Accordingly he asked her and
said to her, "God willing, O my mother, thou bringest me good
news; the jewels and their value have wrought their work and thou
wilt have found acceptance with the Sultan; yea, he will have
shown thee favour and given ear unto thy suit." So she told him
all that had passed and how the Sultan had received her and had
marvelled, both he and his Vizier, at the size and beauty of the
jewels, and how he had promised her that [quoth she] "his
daughter shall be in thy name. But, O my son, ere he promised me,
the Vizier whispered [FN#377] him somewhat, whereupon he appointed
me for three months hence; and I am fearful lest the Vizier be a
man of evil disposition, [FN#378] who will change the King's
mind."

When [FN#379] Alaeddin heard his mother's words and how the Sultan
had appointed her for [FN#380] three months [thence], his heart
was lightened and he rejoiced with an exceeding joy and said,
"Since the Sultan hath promised for [FN#381] three months [hence],
true, it [FN#382] is long, but in any case my joy is great." Then
he thanked her for her kindness and the pains she had
taken [FN#383] and said to her, "By Allah, O my mother, it is as I
were in a tomb and now thou hast raised me up therefrom; and I
praise God the Most High, for I am presently certified that there
is none richer or happier than I in the world." Then he waited
till two of the three months were past, when his mother went out
one day of the days, at sundown, to buy oil, and saw the markets
closed and the city all decorated and the folk setting candles
and flowers in their windows and saw troops, horse and foot, and
mounted eunuchs drawn up in state, with cressets and lustres
burning. At this wonder took her; [FN#384]he went to an oilman's
shop there open and buying oil of him, said to him, "[I conjure
thee] by thy life, O uncle, tell me what is toward to-day in this
city, that the folk are making this decoration and the markets
[are shut] and the houses all adorned and the troops drawn up in
state?" Quoth he, "O woman, methinketh thou art a stranger and
art not of this city." "Nay," answered she, "but I am of this
city;" and he said to her, "Thou art of this city and knowest not
that this is the night of the going in of the Grand Vizier's son
to the Lady Bedrulbudour, the Sultan's daughter? Nay, he is
presently in the bath and yonder Amirs and troops are drawn up
awaiting him, against he come forth, so they may carry him in
procession to the palace of the Sultan's daughter."

When Alaeddin's mother heard this, she was troubled and perplexed
in her wit how she should do to acquaint her son with this woeful
news, for that the poor wretch was counting the hours till the
three months should be ended. So she returned home forthright and
going in to Alaeddin, said to him, "O my son, I have news to tell
thee, but it irketh me for thy chagrin therefrom." Quoth he,
"Speak; what is the news?" And she said to him, "The Sultan hath
gone from his promise to thee in the matter of his daughter, the
Lady Bedrulbudour, for that this very night the Vizier's son
goeth in to her; and indeed methought at the time, [FN#385] O my
son, the Vizier would change the Sultan's mind, even as I told
thee that he bespoke him privily before me." "How knewest thou
this," asked Alaeddin, "that the Vizier's son goeth in this night
to the Lady Bedrulbudour?" So she told him all she had seen of
the decorations in the city, whenas she went to buy the oil, and
how the eunuchs and chiefs of the state were drawn up awaiting
the Vizier's son, against he should come forth of the bath, for
that this was the night of his going in. When Alaeddin heard
this, he fell into a fever of chagrin; [FN#386] but presently he
bethought him of the lamp and rejoiced and said to his mother,
"By thy life, O my mother, methinketh the Vizier's son shall not
rejoice in her, as thou deemest. But now leave us be with this
talk and go lay us the evening-meal, so we may sup; then, when I
shall have passed a while in my chamber, all shall yet be well."

Accordingly, [FN#387] after he had supped, he went into his
chamber and locking the door on himself, fetched the lamp and
rubbed it; whereupon the genie at once appeared to him and said,
"Seek what thou wilt, for I am thy slave and the slave of whoso
hath in his hand the lamp, I and all the slaves of the lamp." And
Alaeddin said to him, "Harkye, I sought of the Sultan to marry
his daughter, and he appointed me for [FN#388] three months' time;
however, he abode not by his promise, but gave her to the
Vizier's son, and the latter purposeth to go in [to her] this
night. Wherefore I do presently command thee, as thou art a loyal
servant of the lamp, that this night, whenas thou seest the bride
and bridegroom abed together, thou take them up in their bed [and
bring them] hither. This is what I seek of thee." "Hearkening and
obedience," answered the genie, "and if thou have a service [to
require of me] other than this, command me whatsoever thou
seekest." And Alaeddin said to him, "I have no present
requirement save that whereof I have bespoken thee." So the slave
disappeared and Alaeddin returned to finish his supper [FN#389]
with his mother.

When he deemed it time for the genie's coming, he arose and
entered his chamber; and after a little, the Marid appeared with
the bridal pair in their bed; whereat Alaeddin rejoiced with
exceeding great joy and said to the slave, "Bear this gallowsbird
hence and couch him in the house of easance." [FN#390] The genie
accordingly took up the bridegroom and couched him in the
draught-house; moreover, ere he left him, he blew on him a blast
wherewith he dried him up, and the Vizier's son abode in woeful
case. Then he returned to Alaeddin and said to him, "An thou need
otherwhat, tell me." And Alaeddin said to him, "Return in the
morning, so thou mayst take them [back] to their place."
"Hearkening and obedience," answered the genie and was gone;
whereupon Alaeddin arose,--and indeed he had scarce believed that
the thing should succeed with him,--and when he saw the Lady
Bedrulbudour in his house, he entreated her with respect, albeit
he had long burned for love of her, and said to her, "O princess
of the fair, think not that I have brought thee hither to soil
shine honour. God forbid! Nay, it was that I might not let
others [FN#391] enjoy thee, for that thy father the Sultan gave me
his word upon thee; so be thou in peace and assurance."
As [FN#392] for the princess, when she found herself in that mean
dark; house and heard Alaeddin's words, fear and trembling get
hold upon her and she was confounded and could return him no
answer. Then he arose and putting off his clothes, placed a sword
between himself and her and lay down by her side in the bed,
without treason; [FN#393] it sufficed him to prevent [the
consummation of] her marriage with the Vizier's son.
Nevertheless, the Lady Bedrulbudour passed the sorriest of
nights, never in her life had she known a worse; whilst the
Vizier's son lay in the draught-house and dared not stir for fear
of the genie.

When it was morning, the genie presented himself before Alaeddin,
without his rubbing the lamp, and said to him, "O my lord, an
thou wish aught, command me withal, so I may do it on my head and
eyes." And Alaeddin bade him go carry the bride and bridegroom to
their own place. The genie did his bidding in the twinkling of an
eye and laying the Vizier's son with the Lady Bedrulbudour, took
them up and set them down in their place in the palace, without
their seeing any one; but they were like to die of fright, when
they felt themselves carried from place to place. Hardly had the
genie set them down and gone out when the Sultan came to visit
his daughter; and when the Vizier's son heard the door open, he
straightway sprang out of bed, knowing that none might enter but
the Sultan, and donned his clothes, [FN#394] albeit this irked him
sore, for that he would fain have warmed himself a little, having
had no time [to do so] since he left the draught-house.
The [FN#395] Sultan came in to his daughter and kissing her
between the eyes, gave her good-morrow and asked her of her
bridegroom and if she was content with him; but she returned him
no answer and looked at him with a dejected air. [FN#396] He
bespoke her several times, but she was silent and answered him
not a word; so he went out from her and going in to the Queen,
told her what had passed between himself and the Lady
Bedrulbudour.

The Queen, so she might not leave the Sultan angry with the Lady
Bedrulbudour, said to him, `'O King of the Age, this is the wont
of most brides, on their wedding-day, to be shamefast and show
somewhat of coyness. So be not vexed with her and after a day or
two she will return to herself and proceed to speak with the
folk; but now, O King of the Age, shame hindereth her from
speaking. However, I purpose to go to her and see her."
Accordingly she arose and donning her clothes, repaired to her
daughter's apartment. Then, going up to her, she gave her
good-morrow and kissed her between the eyes; but the Lady
Bedrulbudour returned her no manner of answer and the Queen said
in herself, "Needs must some strange thing have befallen her, to
trouble her thus." So she asked her, saying, "O my daughter, what
is the cause of this thy behaviour? Tell me what aileth thee,
that I come to thee and give thee good-morrow and thou returnest
me no answer."

The Lady Bedrulbudour raised her head and said to her, "Blame me
not, O my mother; indeed, it behoved me receive thee with all
reverence and worship, since thou honourest me by coming to me;
but I beseech thee hear the cause of this my case and see how
this night I have passed hath been for me the sorriest of nights.
Hardly had we lain down, O my mother, when one, whose fashion I
know not, took up the bed and transported us to a place dark,
foul [FN#397] and mean." Then she told her mother the queen all
that had betided her that night and how they had taken her
bridegroom, leaving her alone, and how after a little there came
another youth and lay down in the place of her bridegroom,
putting a sword between himself and her; "and in the morning"
[quoth she] "he who had brought us thither returned and taking us
up, carried us back to our place here: and hardly had he brought
us hither and left us when my father the Sultan entered and I had
neither heart nor tongue to answer him for stress of fright and
trembling which possessed me. And belike my father is vexed with
me; wherefore I prithee, O my mother, tell him the cause of this
my case, so he be not wroth with me for my failure to answer him
neither blame me, but excuse me."

When [FN#398] the queen heard the princess's story, she said to
her, "O my daughter, beware of [FN#399] telling this tale before
any, lest they [FN#400] say, 'Verily the Sultan's daughter hath
lost her wits.' Marry, thou diddest well in that thou
acquaintedst not thy father with this; and beware, yea [again I
say,] beware, O my daughter, of telling him thereof." "O my
mother," rejoined the Lady Bedrulbudour, "indeed, I bespoke thee
in sober earnest and have not lost my wits; nay, this is what
happened to me, and an thou believe it not from me, ask my
bridegroom." Quoth the queen, "Rise, O my daughter, and put away
these illusions from thy thought; nay, don thy clothes and see
the rejoicing that is toward in the town on thine account and the
festivities that they celebrate in the kingdom for thy sake and
hear the drums and the singing and look upon the decorations, all
in honour of thy nuptials, O my daughter." Accordingly, she
summoned the tirewomen, who dressed the Lady Bedrulbudour and
busked her; whilst the Queen went in to the Sultan and told him
that there had that night betided the princess a dream and
illusions, saying, "BIame her not for her failure to answer
thee." Moreover, she sent for the Vizier's son privily and
questioned him of the affair, whether the Lady Bedrulbudour's
speech was true or not; but he, of his fear to lose his bride,
lest she should go from his hand, said to her, "O my lady, I know
nothing of that which thou sayest;" wherefore the queen was
certified that there had betided her daughter illusions and a
dream.

The wedding rejoicings continued all that day, with dancing-women
and singing-women, and all the instruments of mirth and
minstrelsy were smitten, whilst the queen and the Vizier and his
son were exceeding assiduous in keeping up the festivities, so
the Lady Bedrulbudour should rejoice and her chagrin be
dispelled; nay, they left nought that day of that which exciteth
unto liesse but they did it before her, so she should leave what
was in her mind and be cheered. But all this had no effect on her
and she was silent and thoughtful and confounded at that which
had befallen her that night. True, the Vizier's son had fared
worse than she, for that he was couched in the draught-house; but
he belied [FN#401] the matter and put away that tribulation from
his thought, of his fear lest he should lose his bride and his
rank, [FN#402] more by token that all the folk envied him his lot,
for the much increase of honour it brought him, as also for the
exceeding beauty and loveliness of the Lady Bedrulbudour.

As for Alaeddin, he went out that day and saw the rejoicings
toward in the city and the palace and fell a-laughing, especially
when he heard the folk speak of the honour which had betided the
Vizier's son and the greatness of his good luck, in that he was
become the Sultan's son-in-law, and the exceeding pomp used in
his marriage and bridal festivities; and he said in himself, "Ye
know not, good simple folk that ye are, [FN#403] what befell him
last night, that ye envy him." Then, when the night came in and
it was the season of sleep, Alaeddin arose and entering his
chamber, rubbed the lamp, whereupon the genie appeared to him
forthright and [FN#404] he bade him bring the princess and her
bridegroom, as on the past night, ere the Vizier's son should
take her maidenhead. The genie delayed not, but was absent a
little while; and when it was the appointed time, he returned
with the bed and therein the Lady Bedrulbudour and the Vizier's
son. With the latter he did as he had done the past night, to
wit, he took him and couched him in the draught- house, where he
deft him parched for excess of fright and dismay; whilst Alaeddin
arose and placing the sword between himself and the Lady
Bedrulbudour, lay down and slept till the morning, when the genie
appeared and restored the twain to their place, leaving Alaeddin
full of joy at [the discomfiture of] the Vizier's son.

When the Sultan arose in the morning, he bethought himself to
visit his daughter Bedrulbudour and see an she should do with him
as she had done on the past day; so, as soon as he awoke from his
sleep, he rose and donning his clothes, went to his daughter's
chamber and opened the door. Whereupon the Vizier's son arose
forthright and coming down from the bed, fell to donning his
clothes, with ribs cracking for cold; for that, when the Sultan
entered, it was no great while since the genie had brought them
back. The Sultan went up to his daughter, the Lady Bedrulbudour,
as she lay abed, and raising the curtain, gave her good morning
and kissed her between the eyes and asked her how she did. She
frowned and returned him no answer, but looked at him sullenly,
as she were in sorry case. He was wroth with her, for that she
made him no answer, and thought that something had betided her;
so he drew the sword and said to her, "What hath befallen thee?
Either thou shalt tell me what aileth thee or I will do away thy
life this very moment. Is this the respect that is due to my rank
and the honour in which thou holdest me, that I bespeak thee and
thou answerest me not a word?"

When the Lady Bedrulbudour knew that her father was angry and saw
the naked sword in his hand, she was like to swoon for
fear; [FN#405] so she raised her head and said to him,
"Dear [FN#406] my father, be not wroth with me, neither be thou
hasty in thine anger, for that I am excusable in that which thou
hast seen from me. [FN#407] Do but hearken what hath betided me
and I am well assured that, whenas thou hearest my story of that
which hath happened to me these two nights past, thou wilt excuse
me and Thy Grace will be moved to compassion upon me, as I know
from thy love for me." [FN#408] Then she acquainted him with all
that had befallen her and said to him, "O my father, an thou
believe me not, ask my bridegroom and he will resolve Thy Grace
of everything, albeit I know not what they did with him, when
they took him from my side, nor where they set him." When [FN#409]
the Sultan heard his daughter's story, he was sore concerned and
his eyes brimmed with tears; then, sheathing the sword and coming
up to her, he kissed her and said to her, "O my daughter, why
didst thou not tell me yesterday, so I might have warded off from
thee the torment and affright which have befallen thee this
night? But no matter; arise and put away from thee this thought,
and to-night I will set over thee those who shall guard thee, so
there shall not again befall thee that which befell yesternight."
Then he returned to his pavilion and sent at once for the Vizier,
who came and stood before him, awaiting his commands; and the
Sultan said to him, "O Vizier, how deemest thou of this affair?
Most like thy son hath told thee what happened to him and to my
daughter." "O King of the Age," answered the Vizier, "I have not
seen my son or yesterday or to-day." Whereupon the Sultan
acquainted him with all that his daughter the Lady Bedrulbudour
had told him and said to him, "It is now my will that thou
enquire of thy son the truth of the case, for it may be my
daughter knoweth not for fright what happened to her, though
methinketh her tale is all true." So the Vizier arose and sending
for his son, asked him of all that the Sultan had told him, if it
were true or not. Whereupon, "O my father the Vizier," replied
the youth, "[God] preserve the Lady Bedrulbudour from
leasing! [FN#410] Indeed, all she saith is true and these two
nights past have been for us the sorriest of nights, instead of
being nights of pleasance and delight. Marry, that which befell
me was yet worse, for that, instead of sleeping with my bride in
bed, I lay in the draught-house, a place dark and frightful,
noisome of smell and accursed, and my ribs were straitened
[FN#411] with cold." Brief, he told the Vizier all that had
befallen him and ultimately said to him; "Dear [FN#412] my father,
I beseech thee speak with the Sultan that he release me from this
marriage. True, it is great honour for me to be the Sultan's
son-in-law, more by token that the love of the Lady Bedrulbudour
hath gotten possession of my vitals, but I cannot avail to endure
one more night like the two that are past."

When [FN#413] the Vizier heard his son's words, he grieved and was
exceeding chagrined, for that he had thought to greaten his son
and advance him by making him the King's son-in-law; so he
bethought himself and was perplexed anent the matter and what was
to do therein; [FN#414] and indeed it irked him sore that the
marriage should be dissolved, for that he had long
besought [FN#415] the Ten [FN#416] that he might compass the like
of that affair; [FN#417] so he said to his son, "Have patience, O
my son, so we may see [how it will be] to-night, and we will set
over you guards to guard you; but do not thou let slip this great
honour, for that it hath fallen to none other than thyself."
Therewith he left him and returning to the Sultan, told him that
the Lady Bedrulbudour's story was true; whereupon quoth the
Sultan, "Since the case is thus, we need no
wedding-festivities." [FN#418] And he bade forthright break off
the rejoicings and the marriage was dissolved. The folk and the
people of the city marvelled at this strange thing, especially
when they saw the Vizier and his son go forth the palace in a
pitiable plight for stress of chagrin and despite, and they fell
to asking, "What hath happened and why is the marriage avoided
and the rejoicings broken off?" But none knew what was to do save
Alaeddin, the suitor, [FN#419] who laughed in his sleeve. So the
marriage was annulled; but the Sultan had forgotten his promise
to Alaeddin's mother and never again bethought him thereof,
neither he nor the Vizier; nor knew they whence came that which
had happened.

Alaeddin waited till the three months had elapsed, after which
the Sultan had promised that he would marry him to his daughter,
the Lady Bedrulbudour, then despatched his mother to the Sultan
to require him of the performance of his promise. So she repaired
to the palace and when the Sultan came to the Divan and saw her
standing before him, he remembered his promise to her, that after
three months he would marry his daughter to her son, and turning
to the Vizier, said to him, "O Vizier, yonder is the woman who
presented us with the jewels and we gave her our word that after
three months [we would marry our daughter to her son]. Bring her
before me forthright." So the Vizier went and brought Alaeddin's
mother before the Sultan; and when she came into the presence,
she made her obeisance to him and prayed God to vouchsafe him
glory and endurance of prosperity. The Sultan asked her if she
had a need, and she said to him, "O King of the Age, the three
months are ended, after which thou didst promise me thou wouldst
marry my son Alaeddin to thy daughter the Lady Bedrulbudour." The
Sultan was perplexed at this her claim, more by token that he saw
her in poor case, as she were the meanest of the folk; but the
present which she had made him was exceeding magnificent [and
indeed] beyond price; [FN#420] so he turned to the Vizier and said
to him, "How deemest thou? What shall we do? [FN#421] It is true I
gave her my word, but meseemeth they are poor folk and not of the
chiefs of the people."

The [FN#422] Vizier, who was like to die of envy and chagrin for
that which had befallen his son, said in himself, "How shall one
like this marry the Sultan's daughter and my son lose this
honour?" So he said to the Sultan, [FN#423] "O my lord, it is an
easy matter to rid ourselves of [FN#424] this vagabond, [FN#425]
for that it would not beseem Thy Grace to give thy daughter to a
man like this, of whom it is not known what he is." Quoth the
Sultan, "On what wise shall we rid ourselves of this man, seeing
I have given him my word and a King's word is his bond?" "O my
lord," answered the Vizier, "my counsel is that thou require of
him forty dishes of pure virgin gold, full of jewels, such as
she [FN#426] brought thee the other day, [FN#427] and forty
slave-girls to bear the dishes and forty black slaves." "By
Allah, O Vizier," rejoined the Sultan, "'thou speakest rightly;
for that this is a thing to which he may not avail and so we
shall be rid of him by [fair] means." [FN#428] So he said to
Alaeddin's mother, "Go and tell thy son that I abide by the
promise which I made him, but an if he avail unto my daughter's
dowry; to wit, I require of him forty dishes of pure gold, which
must all be full of jewels [such as] thou broughtest me [erst],
together with forty slave-girls to carry them and forty male
slaves to escort and attend them. If, then; thy son avail unto
this, I will marry him to my daughter."

Alaeddin's mother returned home, shaking her head and saying,
"Whence shall my poor son get these dishes of jewels? Supposing,
for the jewels and the dishes, that he return to the treasure and
gather the whole from the trees,--and withal methinketh not it is
possible to him; but say that he fetch them,--whence [shall he
get] the slaves and slave-girls?" And she gave not over talking
to herself till she reached the house, where Alaeddin awaited
her, and when she came in to him, she said to him, "O my son,
said I not to thee, 'Think not to attain to the Lady
Bedrulbudour'? Indeed, this is a thing that is not possible unto
folk like ourselves." Quoth he, "Tell me what is the news." And
she said to him, "O my son, the Sultan received me with all
courtesy, according to his wont, and meseemeth he meant fairly by
us, but [for] thine accursed enemy the Vizier; for that, after I
had bespoken the Sultan in thy name, even as thou badest me,
reminding him that the term for which he had appointed us was
past and saying to him, 'If Thy Grace would vouchsafe to give
commandment for the marriage of thy daughter the Lady
Bedrulbudour with my son Alaeddin,'--he turned to the Vizier and
spoke to him. The Vizier replied to him in a whisper and after
that the Sultan returned me an answer." Then she told him what
the Sultan required of him and added, "O my son, he would fain
have present answer of thee; but methinketh we have no answer to
give him."

When [FN#429] Alaeddin heard his mother's speech, he laughed and
said, "O my mother, thou sayest we have no answer to make him and
deemest the thing exceeding hard; but now be good enough to
rise [FN#430] and fetch us somewhat to eat, and after we have
dined, thou shalt (an it please the Compassionate) see the
answer. The Sultan like thyself, thinketh he hath sought of me an
extraordinary matter, so he may divert me from the Lady
Bedrulbudour; but the fact is that he seeketh a thing less than I
had looked for. But go now and buy us somewhat we may eat and
leave me to fetch thee the answer." Accordingly, she arose and
went out to buy her need from the market, so she might make ready
the morning-meal; whilst Alaeddin entered his chamber and taking
the lamp, rubbed it. The genie immediately appeared to him and
said, "Seek what thou wilt, O my lord;" whereupon quoth Alaeddin,
"I seek the Sultan's daughter in marriage and he requireth of me
forty dishes of pure gold, each ten pounds in weight and full of
the jewels which be in the garden of the treasure, the forty
dishes to be borne by forty slave girls and each slave-girl to be
accompanied by a male slave; wherefore I will have thee bring me
this, all of it." "Hearkening and obedience, O my lord," replied
the genie and disappearing, was absent awhile, then returned with
the forty slave-girls, each attended by a male slave and bearing
on her head a dish of pure gold, full of precious jewels. So he
brought them before Alaeddin and said to him, "Here is that which
thou soughtest. Tell me an thou need thing or service other than
this." Quoth Alaeddin, "I need nothing [more]; if I need aught, I
will summon thee and tell thee."

Accordingly, the genie vanished and after a little, Alaeddin's
mother returned and entering the house, saw the slaves and
slave-girls; whereat she marvelled and said, "All this is of the
Lamp; God continue it unto my son!" Then, before she put off her
veil, Alaeddin said to her, "O my mother, this is thy time, ere
the Sultan enter his palace [and withdraw] to his harem. Take him
what he seeketh, and that forthright, so he may know that I can
avail unto that which he requireth, ay, and more, and that he was
deluded by the Vizier; albeit he thought to baffle me, he and his
Vizier." Then he arose and opening the house-door, let out the
damsels and the slaves, pair by pair, each damsel with a slave by
her side, so that they filled the street. His mother forewent
them and the people of the quarter, when they saw that rare and
magnificent sight, stood looking and marvelling and gazing upon
the faces of the slave-girls and their grace and goodliness [and
their apparel], for that they were clad in clothes all inwoven
with gold and studded with jewels; nay, the least one's clothes
of them were worth thousands. Moreover they looked at the
dishes [FN#431] and saw flashing therefrom a radiance that
outshone the light of the sun, albeit each dish was covered with
a piece of brocade, gold-inwrought and studded eke with precious
jewels. Alaeddin's [FN#432] mother fared on and the damsels and
slaves followed after her, in all fair ordinance and disposition,
whilst the folk stood to gaze on the beauty of the slave-girls
and extolled the perfection of the Almighty Creator, till she
reached the palace and entered it with them.

When the eunuchs and chamberlains and captains of the guard saw
them, wonder took them and they were breathless for amaze at this
sight, the like whereof they had never in their lives seen, and
especially at the slave girls, each one of whom would ravish the
wit of an anchorite. Withal, the chamberlains and captains of the
Sultan's guards were all of them sons of grandees and Amirs; and
they marvelled yet more at the damsels' costly raiment and the
dishes which they bore on their heads and on which they might not
open their eyes, [FN#433] for the excess of their flashing and
radiance. Then the guards [FN#434] entered and told the Sultan,
who bade bring them before him forthright into the Divan. So
Alaeddin's mother entered with them and when they came before the
Sultan, they all did obeisance to him with the utmost courtliness
and gravity and invoked on him glory and prosperity; then,
raising the dishes from their heads, they set them down before
him and stood with their hands clasped behind them, after they
had removed the covers.

The Sultan wondered with an exceeding wonderment and was
confounded at the beauty of the girls and their loveliness, which
overpassed description; his wit was bewildered, when he saw the
golden dishes, full of jewels that dazzled the sight, and he was
amazed at this marvel, so that he became as one dumb, unable to
speak aught, of the excess of his wonderment; nay, his wit was
the more perplexed, forasmuch as this had all been accomplished
in an hour's time. Then he bade carry the slave-girls and their
burdens to the pavilion of the Lady Bedrulbudour; so the damsels
took up the dishes and entered; whereupon Alaeddin's mother came
forward and said to the Sultan, "O my lord, this is no great
matter for the Lady Bedrulbudour's exalted rank; nay, she
deserveth manifold this." So the Sultan turned to the Vizier and
said to him, "How sayst thou, O Vizier? He that can in so short a
time avail unto riches like these, is he not worthy to be the
Sultan's son-in-law and to have his daughter to bride?" Now the
Vizier marvelled at the greatness of these riches yet more than
the Sultan, but envy was killing him and waxed on him more and
more, when he saw that the Sultan was content with the
bride-gift [FN#435] and the dowry; withal he could not gainstand
the [manifest] truth and say to the Sultan, "He is not worthy;"
so he cast about to work upon him by practice, that he might
hinder him from giving his daughter the Lady Bedrulbudour to
Alaeddin, and accordingly said to him, [FN#436] "O my lord, all
the treasures of the world were not worth a paring of thy
daughter Bedrulbudour's nails; indeed, Thy Highness overrateth
this upon her." [FN#437]

When [FN#438] the Sultan heard the Vizier's words, he knew that
this his speech arose from the excess of his envy; so he turned
to Alaeddin's mother and said to her, "O woman, go to thy son and
tell him that I accept of him the marriage-gift and abide by my
promise to him and that my daughter is his bride and he my
son-in-law; so bid him come hither, that I may make acquaintance
with him. There shall betide him from me nought but all honour
and consideration and this night shall be the beginning of the
bridal festivities. But, as I said to thee, let him come hither
to me without delay." So she returned home swiftlier than the
wind, [FN#439] of her haste to bring her son the good news; and
she was like to fly for joy at the thought that her son was to
become the Sultan's son-in-law. As soon as she had taken her
leave, the Sultan bade break up the Divan and entering the Lady
Bedrulbudour's pavilion, commanded to bring the damsels and the
dishes before his daughter and himself, so she should see them.
So they brought them and when the Lady Bedrulbudour saw the
jewels, she was amazed and said, " Methinketh there is not one of
these jewels found in the treasuries of the world." Then she
looked at the damsels and marvelled at their beauty and grace and
knew that this was all from her new bridegroom and that he had
proffered it to her service. So she rejoiced, albeit she had been
sad and sorry for her [whilom] bridegroom the Vizier's son,--she
rejoiced, [I say], with an exceeding joy, when she saw the jewels
and the beauty of the damsels, and was cheered; whilst her father
rejoiced exceedingly in her joy, in that he saw her put off
chagrin and dejection. Then he said to her, "O my daughter
Bedrulbudour, doth this please thee? Indeed, methinketh this thy
bridegroom is goodlier [FN#440] than the Vizier's son, and God
willing, O my daughter, thou shalt rejoice with him
abundantly." [FN#441]

So much for the Sultan and as for Alaeddin, when his mother came
to the house and entered and he saw her laughing of the excess of
her joy, he foreboded good news and said, " To God
Everlasting [FN#442] be praise! Accomplished is that which I
sought." And she said to him, "Glad tidings, O my son! Let thy
heart rejoice and thine eye be solaced in the attainment of thy
desire, for that the Sultan accepteth thine offering, to wit, the
bride gift and the dowry of the Lady Bedrulbudour, and she is thy
bride and this, O my son, is the night of your [FN#443] bridal and
thy going in to the Lady Bedrulbudour. Nay, the Sultan, that he
might certify me of his word, proclaimed thee his son-in-law
before the folk and declared that this should be the
wedding-night; but he said to me, 'Let thy son come hither to me,
so I may make acquaintance with him, and I will receive him with
all honour and worship.' And now, O my son, my office [FN#444] is
ended, whatsoever remaineth is a matter for thee." [FN#445]

Alaeddin kissed his mother's hand and thanked her amain for her
kindness; [FN#446] then he arose and entering his chamber, took
the lamp and rubbed it; whereupon the genie presented himself and
said to him, "Here am I; seek what thou wilt." Quoth Alaeddin,
"My will is that thou take me to a bath, whose like is not in the
world, and fetch me a suit of royal raiment and exceeding costly,
such as no king can boast." "Hearkening and obedience," replied
the Marid and taking him up, brought him intro a bath, never saw
King nor Kisra [FN#447] its like, for it was of alabaster and
agate and full of marvellous limnings that ravished the sight,
and therein was a saloon all embossed with precious jewels. None
was there; but, when Alaeddin entered, there came in to him one
of the Jinn in human semblance and washed him and bathed him to
the utmost of the wish: after [FN#448] which he went forth the
bath to the outer saloon, where he found his clothes taken away
and in their stead a suit of the richest royal apparel. Then
sherbets were brought him and coffee with ambergris and he drank
and arose; whereupon there came to him a troop of slaves and clad
him in those [FN#449] sumptuous clothes [FN#450] and he dressed and
perfumed himself with essences and sweet-scented smoke. [FN#451]
Now thou knowest [FN#452] that Alaeddin was the son of a poor man,
a tailor: yet now none had thought it, [FN#453] but had said,
"This is the chiefest of the sons of the kings," extolled be the
perfection of Him who changeth and is not changed!

Then the slave of the lamp came to him and taking him up, set him
down in his house and said to him, "O my lord, dost thou need
aught?" "Yes," answered Alaeddin; "I will have thee bring me
eight-and-forty mamelukes, [FN#454] four-and-twenty to walk before
me and four-and-twenty to walk behind me, with their horses and
clothes and arms, and let all that is upon them and their horses
be of stuffs costly and precious exceedingly, such as are not
found in kings' treasuries. Then bring me a stallion fit for the
riding of the Chosroes and be his trappings all of gold, embossed
with noble jewels; and bring me eight-and-forty thousand diners,
in each mameluke's hand a thousand, for that I purpose presently
to visit the Sultan; wherefore delay thou not on me, since I
cannot go thither without all that whereof I have bespoken thee.
Bring me also twelve slave-girls, who must be unique in
loveliness and clad in the richest of raiment, so they may attend
my mother to the Sultan's palace, and let each slave-girl have
with her a suit of apparel fit for the wearing of kings'
wives." [FN#455]

"Hearkening and obedience," replied the genie and disappearing,
brought him in the twinkling of an eye all that he had commanded
him withal, whilst in his hand he held a stallion, whose like is
not among the horses of the Arabs of the Arabs, [FN#456] with
housings of the richest stuffs brocaded with gold; whereupon
Alaeddin called his mother forthright and delivered her the
twelve slave-girls and gave her the [twelve] suits, [FN#457] so
she might dress herself [FN#458] and go with them to the Sultan's
palace. Then he despatched one of the mamelukes thither, to see
an the Sultan were come forth of the harem or not; so he went and
returning, swiftlier than lightning, said to him, "O my lord, the
Sultan awaiteth thee." Accordingly he arose and mounting, [set
forth], whilst the mamelukes rode before him and after him,
(extolled be the perfection of the Lord who created them
with [FN#459] that which clothed them of beauty and grace!),
strewing gold upon the folk before their lord Alaeddin, who
overpassed them all of his grace and goodliness, and ask thou not
of kings' sons, [FN#460] extolled be the perfection of the Giver,
the Eternal!  Now all this was of the virtue of the wonderful
lamp, [FN#461] which gifted whoso possessed it with goodliness and
grace and wealth and wisdom.

The folk marvelled at Alaeddin's bounty and at the excess of his
munificence and were amazed when they saw that which graced him
of beauty and goodliness and his courtliness and dignity; yea,
they extolled the perfection of the Compassionate One for this
His noble creature and all of them great and small [FN#462] called
down blessings on him, albeit they knew him for the son of such
an one the tailor; yet none envied him, but all said, "He is
deserving." So [FN#463] he fared on his way, with the mamelukes
before him and behind him, scattering gold upon the folk, till he
came to the palace.

Now the Sultan had summoned to his presence the chiefs of his
state and telling them that he had passed his word for the
marriage of his daughter to Alaeddin, bade them await the latter,
commanding them that, when he came, they should all go out to
meet him; moreover, he assembled the amirs and viziers and
chamberlains and guards and captains of the troops and they were
all awaiting Alaeddin at the door of the palace. When he arrived,
he would have dismounted at the door, but there came up to him
one of the Amirs, whom the Sultan had deputed to that office, and
said to him, "O my lord, the commandment is that thou enter,
riding on thy charger, so thou mayst alight at the door of the
Divan." So they all forewent him and he entered till they brought
him to the door of the Divan. There sundry of them came forward
and held his stirrup, whilst some supported him on both sides and
other some took him by the hand, and so they dismounted him. Then
the Amirs and officers of state forewent him and brought him into
the Divan, till he drew near the Sultan's throne; whereupon the
latter came down forthright from his seat and embracing him,
hindered him from kissing the carpet and seated him beside
himself on his right hand. Alaeddin did that which behoveth and
befitteth unto kings of obeisance and invocation and said to him,
"O our lord the Sultan, thy Grace's munificence hath
vouchsafed [FN#464] to accord me the Lady Bedrulbudour thy
daughter, albeit I am unworthy of this great favour, for that I
am of the lowliest of thy slaves; wherefore I beseech God that He
keep and continue thee. Indeed, O King, my tongue faileth to
thank thee [as were behoving] for the greatness of this boon,
overpassing its competence, [FN#465] wherewith thou hast favoured
me, and I beseech Thy Grace to vouchsafe me ground, such as is
meet, so I may build thereon a palace that shall be fit for the
Lady Bedrulbudour."

The Sultan was amazed when he saw Alaeddin in this regal array
and beheld his grace and goodliness and the mamelukes standing in
attendance upon him in all their comeliness and fair favour; yea,
and his wonderment redoubled when Alaeddin's mother came up
attired in rich and costly raiment, as she were a queen, and he
saw twelve slave-girls in her service, preceding her, their hands
clasped behind their backs, with all worship and observance.
Moreover, he noted Alaeddin's eloquence and the elegance of his
speech and was amazed thereat, he and all who were present with
him in the Divan, whilst fire was kindled in the Vizier's heart
for envy of Alaeddin, so that he was like to die. Then, after the
Sultan had heard Alaeddin's compliment and had seen the greatness
of his quality and his modesty and eloquence, he strained him to
his bosom and kissed him, saying, "It irketh me, O my son, that I
have not known thee [FN#466] before to-day." So, [FN#467] when he
saw Alaeddin on this fashion, he rejoiced in him with an
exceeding joy and at once bade the music [FN#468] and the
drums [FN#469] strike up; then, rising, he took him by the hand
and carried him into the palace, where the evening-meal had been
made ready and the servants set the tables. There he sat down and
seated Alaeddin on his right hand; whereupon the viziers and
chiefs of the state and the grandees of the realm sat also, each
in his several room, whilst the drums beat and they held high
festival in the palace. [FN#470]

The Sultan proceeded to make familiar with Alaeddin and to talk
with him, and Alaeddin answered him with all courtliness and
fluency, as he had been bred in kings' palaces or as he were
their constant associate; [FN#471] and the more the talk was
prolonged between them, the more gladness and joy redoubled on
the Sultan for that which he heard of the goodliness of
Alaeddin's answers and the sweetness of his speech. Then, when
they had eaten and drunken and the tables were removed, the
Sultan bade fetch the Cadis and the witnesses; so they came and
knotted the knot and wrote the writ [of marriage] between
Alaeddin and the Lady Bedrulbudour. Therewith Alaeddin arose and
would have taken leave; but the Sultan laid hold on him and said
to him, "Whither away, O my son? The bride-feast is toward and
the bride present; the knot is knotted and the writ written." "O
my lord the king," answered Alaeddin, "I would fain build the
Lady Bedrulbudour a palace, besorting her rank and station, and
it may not be that I should go in to her without this; but, God
willing, the building shall, by the diligent endeavour of thy
slave and by Thy Grace's auspice, [FN#472] be right speedily
despatched. Indeed, I long for present enjoyment of the Lady
Bedrulbudour; but it behoveth me [first] apply myself to that
which is incumbent on me for her service." [FN#473] Quoth the
Sultan, "O my son, look thyself out the ground which thou deemest
apt to thine end and take it. All is in thy hand; [FN#474], but
here before my palace is a spacious piece of ground, which
meseemeth were best; so, if it please thee, build thou the palace
thereon." And Alaeddin answered him, saying, "Indeed, it is my
utmost desire to be near Thy Grace."

Then he took leave of the Sultan and going forth, mounted and
rode, with his mamelukes before him and behind him, whilst the
folk all prayed for him and said, "By Allah, he is deserving!"
till he came to his house and alighting from his stallion,
entered his chamber and rubbed the lamp; whereupon the genie
stood before him and said to him, "Seek what thou wilt, O my
lord" Quoth Alaeddin, "I desire of thee an important service, to
wit, that thou build me with all speed a palace before that of
the Sultan, which shall be marvellous in its building, never saw
kings its like, and be it complete with all its requisites of
kingly and magnificent furniture and so forth." "Hearkening and
obedience," replied the genie and [FN#475] disappeared; but,
before the dawn broke, he came to Alaeddin and said to him, "O my
lord, the palace is finished to the utmost of the wish;
wherefore, an thou wouldst see it, arise forthright and look on
it." So Alaeddin arose and the genie carried him, in the
twinkling of an eye, to the palace, which when he saw, he was
amazed at its building, for that all its stones were of jade and
alabaster and porphyry and mosaic. The genie carried him into a
treasury full of all manner of gold and silver and precious
jewels past count or reckoning, price or estimation; then he
brought him into another place, where he saw all the requisites
of the table, platters and spoons and ewers and basins and cups,
of gold and silver, and thence to the kitchen, where he found
cooks, [FN#476] with their cooking-gear and utensils, all on like
wise of gold and silver. Moreover, he brought him into a place,
which he found full of coffers overflowing with royal raiment,
such as ravished the wit, gold-inwoven stuffs, Indian and
Chinese, and brocades, and he showed him also many other places,
all full of that which beggareth description, till at last he
brought him into a stable, wherein were horses whose like is not
found with the kings of the world; and therewithin he showed him
a storehouse, full of housings and saddles of price, all
broidered with pearls and precious stones and so forth.

Alaeddin was amazed and bewildered at the greatness of these
riches, whereunto the mightiest king in the world might not
avail, and all the work of one night; more by token that the
palace was full of slaves and slave girls such as would bewitch a
saint with their loveliness. But the most marvellous of all was
that he saw in the palace an upper hall [FN#477] and [FN#478] a
belvedere [FN#479] with four-and-twenty oriels, all wroughten of
emeralds and rubies and other jewels, and of one of these oriels
the lattice-work was by his desire left unfinished, [FN#480] so
the Sultan should fail of its completion. When he had viewed the
palace, all of it, he rejoiced and was exceeding glad; then he
turned to the genie and said to him, "I desire of thee one thing
which is lacking and whereof I had forgotten to bespeak thee."
Quoth the slave, " Seek what thou wilt, O my lord;" and Alaeddin
said to him, "I will have thee bring me a carpet Of fine brocade,
all inwoven with gold, and spread it from my palace to that of
the Sultan, so the Lady Bedrulbudour, whenas she cometh hither,
may walk thereon and not upon the earth." So the genie was absent
a little and returning, said to him, ''O my lord, that which thou
soughtest Of me is here." Therewithal he took him and showed him
the carpet, which ravished the wit, and it was spread from the
Sultan's palace to that of Alaeddin; then taking him up, he set
him down in his own house.

It [FN#481] was now grown high day; so the Sultan arose from sleep
and opening a window of his pavilion, looked forth and saw
buildings [FN#482] before his palace; whereupon he fell to rubbing
his eyes and opening them wide and looking farther, saw a
magnificent palace, that bewildered the wits, and a carpet spread
therefrom to his own palace; as on like wise did the doorkeepers
and all who were in the palace, and their wits were bewildered at
the sight. At this juncture the Vizier presented himself and as
he entered, he espied the new palace and the carpet and marvelled
also; so, when he came in to the Sultan, the twain fell to
talking of this strange matter and marvelling, for that they saw
a thing which amazed the beholder and dilated the heart; and they
said, "Verily, methinketh kings may not avail unto the building
of the like of this palace." Then the Sultan turned to the Vizier
and said to him, "How now? Deemest thou Alaeddin worthy to be
bridegroom to my daughter the Lady Bedrulbudour? Hast thou seen
and considered this royal building and all these riches which
man's wit cannot comprehend?" The Vizier, of his envy of
Alaeddin, answered him, saying, "O King of the Age, indeed this
palace and its building and all these riches may not be but by
means of enchantment, for that no man among men, no, not the
mightiest of them in dominion or the greatest in wealth, might
avail to upraise and stablish [the like of] this building in one
night." Quoth the Sultan, "I marvel at thee how thou still
deemest evil of Alaeddin; but methinketh it ariseth from thine
envy of him, for that thou wast present when he sought of me a
place whereon to build a palace for my daughter and I accorded
him, before thee, [leave to build] a palace on this ground; and
he who brought me, to my daughter's dower, jewels such that no
kings possess one thereof, shall he lack ableness to build a
palace like this?" When [FN#483] the Vizier heard the Sultan's
speech and understood that he loved Alaeddin greatly, his envy of
him increased; withal he availed not to do aught against him, so
he was dumb and could make the Sultan no answer.

Meanwhile Alaeddin--seeing that it was high day and that the time
was come when he should go to the palace, for that his
wedding-festivities were toward and the Amirs and Viziers and
chiefs of the state were all with the Sultan, so they might be
present at the bridal--arose and rubbed the lamp; whereupon the
genie presented himself and said to him, "O my lord, seek what
thou wilt, for that I am before thee, at thy service." Quoth
Alaeddin, "I purpose presently to go to the Sultan's palace, and
to-day is the wedding; wherefore I have occasion for ten thousand
diners, which I will have thee bring me." The slave was absent
the twinkling of an eye and returned to him with the money;
whereupon Alaeddin arose and taking horse, with his mamelukes
behind him and before him, rode to the palace, scattering gold
upon the folk, as he passed, so that they were fulfilled with the
love of him and the greatness of his munificence. [FN#484] When he
came to the palace and the Amirs and eunuchs and soldiers, who
were standing awaiting him, saw him, they hastened forthright to
the Sultan and told him; whereupon he arose and coming to meet
him, embraced him and kissed him; then he took him by the hand
and carried him into the palace. where he sat down and seated him
on his right hand.

Now the city was all adorned and the instruments [of music] were
smiting in the palace and the singing-women singing. Then the
Sultan trade serve the morning-meal; so the slaves and mamelukes
hastened to spread the table and it was such as kings might take
example by. [FN#485] The Sultan sat with Alaeddin and the officers
of state and the chiefs of the realm and they ate and drank till
they were satisfied; and great was the rejoicing in the palace
and the city. Glad were all the chiefs of the state and the folk
rejoiced in all the realm, whilst there came from far regions the
notables of the provinces and the governors of the cities, so
they might see Alaeddin's wedding and his bride-feast. The Sultan
still marvelled in himself at Alaeddin's mother, how she had come
to him in poor clothes, whilst her son had command of this
exceeding wealth; and as for the folk, who came to the Sultan's
palace, to gaze upon the wedding-festivities, when they saw
Alaeddin's palace and the goodliness of its building, there took
them great wonderment how so magnificent a building had been
upreared in one night and they fell all to praying for Alaeddin
and saying, "God prosper him! By Allah, he is deserving. God's
blessing on his days!"

Meanwhile [FN#486] Alaeddin, having made an end of the
morning-meal, arose and taking leave of the Sultan, mounted with
his mamelukes and rode to his palace, so he might prepare for the
reception of his bride, the Lady Bedrulbudour. As he passed, all
the folk cried out to him with one voice, saying, " God gladden
thee! God increase thee in glory! God continue thee!" And so they
brought him home in great procession, what while he showered gold
on them. When he came to his palace, he alighted and entering,
sat down in the Divan, whilst the mamelukes stood before him with
clasped hands. After a little they brought him sherbets and he
gave commandment to his mamelukes and slave-girls and eunuchs and
all who were in his palace that they should make ready to receive
the Lady Bedrulbudour, his bride. Then, when it was the time of
the midafternoon prayer [FN#487] and the air grew cool and the
heat of the sun abated, [FN#488] the Sultan bade the troops and
the Amirs and the Viziers go down to the horse-course. So they
all repaired thither and with them the Sultan himself; whereupon
Alaeddin also arose and mounting with his mamelukes, went down
into the plain and showed his horsemanship; then he fell to
playing [FN#489] in the tilting-ground and there was none could
stand before him. Now he was riding a stallion whose like is not
among the horses of the Arabs of the Arabs [FN#490] and his bride
the Lady Bedrulbudour was looking upon him from the window of her
pavilion, and when she saw his grace and goodliness and knightly
prowess, she was overcome with his love and was like to fly for
joy in him. Then, after they had played [some] bouts [FN#491] in
the plain and each had shown what was in him of horsemanship,
(but Alaeddin overpassed them all,) the Sultan went to his palace
and Alaeddin on like wise returned home.

When it was eventide, the chiefs of the state and the Viziers
went and taking Alaeddin, carried him in procession to the Royal
Bath, the Renowned ; [FN#492] so he entered and bathed and
perfumed himself, then, coming forth, he donned a suit yet richer
than the first and mounted, whilst the troops rode before him and
the Amirs and Viziers. So they fared on with him in great state,
with four of the Viziers for his sword-bearers, whilst all the
troops and people of the city, both townsfolk and strangers,
walked in procession before him, carrying flambeaux and drums and
flutes and instruments of mirth and music, till they brought him
to his palace, when he alighted and entering, sat down, as did
also the Viziers and Amirs who were in his company, whilst the
mamelukes brought sherbets and sweetmeats [FN#493] and gave all
who were with him in the procession to drink, albeit they were a
multitude of folk whose number might not be told. Moreover, he
gave commandment unto his mamelukes, and they went out to the
door of the palace and fell to showering gold upon the folk.

Meanwhile, [FN#494] when the Sultan returned from the horse-course
and entered his palace, he bade forthright carry his daughter the
Lady Bedrulbudour in procession to the palace of her bridegroom
Alaeddin. So the troops forthright mounted with the officers of
state, who had been in Alaeddin's procession, and the slave-girls
and eunuchs went out with flambeaux and carried the Lady
Bedrulhudour in great state to her bridegroom's palace,
Alaeddin's mother by her side and before her the women of the
Viziers and Amirs and grandees and notables. Moreover, she had
with her eight and-forty slave-girls, whom Alaeddin had presented
to her, in each one's hand a great candle of camphor and
ambergris, set in a candlestick of gold, studded with jewels; and
all the men and women in the palace went out with her and fared
on before her, till they brought her to her bridegroom's palace
and carrying her up to her pavilion, [FN#495] attired her in
various robes [FN#496] and displayed her. Then, after they had
made an end of displaying her, they carried her to the pavilion
of her groom Alaeddin and he went in to her. Now his mother was
with the Lady Bedrulbudour, and when he came up and did off her
veil, she fell to gazing upon the bride's beauty and grace and
looked at the pavilion, the which was all wroughten [FN#497] of
gold and jewels and therein were golden lustres, all embossed
with emeralds and rubies; and she said in herself, "Methought the
Sultan's palace was magnificent; but, for this pavilion [FN#498]
alone, I doubt me the greatest of the Chosroes and the kings
never owned its match; nor, methinketh, might all mankind avail
to make the like thereof." And the Lady Bedrulbudour also fell to
looking and marvelling at the palace [FN#499] and its
magnificence. Then the table was laid and they ate and drank and
made merry; and presently there appeared before them fourscore
slave-girls, each with an instrument in her hand of the
instruments of mirth and music. So they plied their finger-tips
and touching their strings, struck up with plaintive airs, till
they clove in sunder the hearts of the listeners, whilst the Lady
Bedrulbudour redoubled in wonderment and said in herself, "Never
in my life heard I the like of these songs;" so that she forgot
to eat and fell to listening. As for Alaeddin, he proceeded to
pour to her the wine and give her to drink with his own hand, and
mirth and good cheer and delight went round among them and it was
a rare night, such as Iskender of the Horns [FN#500] never in his
time spent. Then, after they had made an end of eating and
drinking, the tables were removed from before them and Alaeddin
arose and went in to his bride.

When it was the morning, Alaeddin arose and his treasurer brought
him a costly suit of the richest of kings' raiment; so he donned
it and sat down; whereupon coffee was brought him with ambergris
and he drank thereof and called for the horses. Accordingly, they
were saddled and he mounted and rode, with his mamelukes behind
him and before him, to the Sultan's palace. When he reached it
and entered, the eunuchs went in and acquainted the Sultan with
his presence; which [FN#501] when he heard, he arose forthwith and
coming to meet Alaeddin, embraced him and kissing him, as he were
his son, seated him on his right hand. Moreover the Viziers and
Amirs and officers of state and grandees of the realm invoked
blessings on him and the Sultan gave him joy [FN#502] and prayed
God prosper him. Then he bade lay breakfast; [FN#503] so they laid
[it] and they all broke their fast; and after they had eaten and
drunken their sufficiency and had finished and the servants had
removed the tables from before them, Alaeddin turned to the
Sultan and said to him, "O my lord, [belike] Thy Grace will
vouchsafe to honour me this day at the morning-meal [FN#503] with
the Lady Bedrulbudour, thy precious daughter, and be Thy Grace's
company all thy viziers and the chief officers of thy state."
Quoth the Sultan, (and indeed he rejoiced in him),
"Gladly, [FN#504] O my son," and bidding the Viziers and officers
of state and grandees attend him, arose forthright and mounted;
whereupon Alaeddin and the others mounted also and they all rode
till they came to Alaeddin's palace.

When the Sultan entered the palace and viewed its building and
ordinance and saw its stones, which were of jade and agate, he
was amazed [FN#505] and his wit was bewildered at that affluence
and wealth and magnificence; so he turned to the Vizier and said
to him, "How sayst thou, O Vizier? Hast thou in all thy days seen
aught like this? Are there found with the greatest of the kings
of the world riches and gold and jewels such as these we see in
this palace?" "O my lord the King," answered the Vizier, "this is
a thing beyond the competence of a king of the sons of Adam, nor
might all the people of the earth together avail to build a
palace like this; nay, there are no craftsmen living able to do
work like this, except ;it be, as I said to Thy Grace, by might
of magic." The Sultan knew that the Vizier, in seeking to
convince him that this was not by might of men, but all of it
enchantment, still spoke not but of his envy of Alaeddin; so he
said to him, "Enough, O Vizier; let us have no more of thy talk.
I know the cause which maketh thee speak on this wise."

Then Alaeddin forewent the Sultan till he brought him to the high
pavilion [FN#507] and he looked at the belvedere [FN#508] and its
oriols [FN#509] and lattices, [FN#510] all wroughten of emeralds
and rubies and other precious stones, and was amazed and
astonied; his wit was bewildered and he abode perplexed in his
thought. Then he fell to going round about the pavilion and
viewing these things that ravished the sight, till presently he
espied the casement [FN#511] which Alaeddin had purposely left
wanting and unfinished. When the Sultan examined it and saw that
it was unfinished, he said, "Woe is me for thee, O casement, that
thou art not perfect!" Then, turning to the Vizier, he said to
him, "Knowest thou the reason of the lack of completion of this
casement and its lattices?"  "O [FN#512] my lord," answered the
Vizier, "methinketh it is because Thy Grace hastened upon
Alaeddin with the wedding and he had no time to complete it." Now
Alaeddin had meanwhile gone in to his bride, the Lady
Bedrulbudour, to acquaint her with the coming of her father the
Sultan; and when he returned, the Sultan said to him, "O my son
Alaeddin, what is the reason that the lattice[-work] of yonder
oriel [FN#513] is not completed?" "O King of the Age," replied
Alaeddin, "by reason of the haste made with the bridal, the
craftsmen might not avail to [FN#514] finish it." Quoth the Sultan
to him, "It is my wish to finish it myself." And Alaeddin
answered, saying, "God prolong thy glory, O King; so shall there
remain unto thee a remembrance [FN#515] in thy daughter's palace."

Accordingly the Sultan bade straightway fetch jewellers and
goldsmiths and commanded to give them from the treasury all that
they needed of gold and jewels and [precious] metals; so they
came and he bade them do that which was wanting of the
lattice-work of the [unfinished] oriel. [FN#516] Meanwhile, the
Lady Bedrulbudour came out to receive her father the Sultan, and
when she came up to him and he saw her smiling-faced he embraced
her and kissed her and taking her [by the hand], went in with her
to her pavilion. So they entered all, for that it was the
appointed time of the morning-meal and they had set one table for
the Sultan and the Lady Bedrulbudour and Alaeddin and another for
the Vizier and the officers of state and grandees of the realm
and captains and chamberlains and deputies. The Sultan sat
between his daughter, the Lady Bedrulbudour, and his son-in- law
Alaeddin, and when he put his hand to the food and tasted it,
wonder took him at the richness of the meats and the
exquisiteness of their seasonings. [FN#517] Now there stood before
them fourscore damsels, each as it were she said to the full
moon, "Rise, so I may sit in thy place;" and in each one's hand
was an instrument of mirth and music. So they tuned their
instruments and touched their strings and struck up with
plaintive [FN#518] airs that dilated the mourning heart. [FN#519]
The Sultan was cheered and the time was pleasant to him and he
rejoiced and said, " Verily, Kings and Kaisers would fail
of [FN#520] this thing;"

Then they fell to eating and drinking and the cup went round
among them till they had taken their sufficiency, when there came
sweetmeats [FN#521] and various kinds of fruits and so forth; and
these were laid in another saloon. So they removed thither and
took their fill of those dainties; after which the Sultan arose,
that he might see if the work of the jewellers and goldsmiths
likened that of the palace. So he went up to them and viewed
their work and how they wrought and saw that they were far from
availing to do work like that [of the rest] of Alaeddin's
palace. [FN#522] Moreover [FN#523] they told him that all they
found in his treasury they had brought and it sufficed not;
whereupon he bade open the Great Treasury and give them what they
needed and that, if it sufficed not, they should take that which
Alaeddin had given him. So they took all the jewels assigned them
by the Sultan and wrought with them, but found that these also
sufficed them not, nor might they complete withal the half of
that which lacked of the lattice work of the oriel; [FN#524]
whereupon the Sultan bade take all the jewels which should be
found with the Viziers and chiefs of the state; and accordingly
they took them all and wrought therewith; but this also sufficed
not.

When it was morning, Alaeddin went up to view the jewelers' work
and saw that they had not completed half the lacking
lattice-work; whereupon he bade them incontinent undo all that
they had wrought and restore the jewels to their owners.
Accordingly, they undid it all and sent to the Sultan that which
was his and to the Viziers [and others] that which was theirs.
Then they went to the Sultan and told him that Alaeddin had
commanded them of this; whereupon he asked them, "What said he to
you and why would he not have the lattice-work finished and why
undid he that which you had done?" And they said to him, "O my
lord, we know nothing, save that he bade us undo all that we had
done." Whereupon the Sultan immediately called for the horses and
arising, mounted and rode to Alaeddin's palace.

Meanwhile Alaeddin, after dismissing the goldsmiths and the
jewellers, entered his closet and rubbed the lamp; whereupon the
genie forthwith appeared and said to him, "Seek what thou wilt;
thy slave is before thee." And Alaeddin said to him, "It is my
will that thou complete the lacking lattice-work of the
oriel." [FN#525] "On my head and eyes [be it]," replied the slave
and disappearing, returned after a little and said to him, "O my
lord, that whereof thou commandedst me I have performed." So
Alaeddin went up to the belvedere [FN#526] and found all its
lattices [FN#527] perfect; and whilst he was viewing them, behold
the [chief] eunuch [FN#528] came in to him and said to him, "O my
lord, the Sultan cometh to visit thee and is at the palace-door."
So he came down forthright and went to meet the Sultan,
who [FN#529] said to him, when he saw him, "Wherefore, O my son,
hast thou done thus, and why sufferedst thou not the jewellers
complete the lattice-work of the oriel, [FN#530] so there might
not remain a place in thy palace [FN#531] defective?" "O King of
the Age," answered Alaeddin, "I left it not imperfect but of my
free will, nor did I lack of ableness to complete it. However, I
could not brook that Thy Grace should honour me [with thy
presence] in a palace [FN#532] wherein there was somewhat lacking;
wherefore, so thou mayst know that it was not for lack of
ableness that I left it uncomplete, [FN#533] let Thy Grace go up
and see the lattice-work of the kiosk, [FN#534] an there be aught
lacking thereto."

The Sultan accordingly went up to the pavilion [FN#535] and
entering the kiosk, [FN#536] viewed it right and left and saw no
manner defect in its lattices, but found them all perfect;
whereat he was astounded and embracing Alaeddin, fell a-kissing
him and saying, "O my son, what is this extraordinary thing? In
one night thou dost a work wherefrom the jewellers would fail in
months! By Allah, methinketh thou hast not thy fellow [FN#536] in
the world!" Quoth Alaeddin, "God prolong thy life and perpetuate
thy continuance! Thy slave is not worthy of this praise." "By
Allah, O my son," rejoined the Sultan, "thou deservest all
praise, in that thou hast done a thing wherefrom [all the]
craftsmen of the world would fail." Then he went down and
entering the pavilion of his daughter, the Lady Bedrulbudour,
found her rejoicing exceedingly over this great magnificence
wherein she was; and after he had rested with her awhile, he
returned to his palace.

Now Alaeddin used every day to mount and ride through the town,
with his mamelukes behind him and before him, strewing gold upon
the people, right and left, and the folk, stranger and neighbour,
near and far, were fulfilled with the love of him for the excess
of his munificence and his bounty. Moreover he exceeded in
benefaction of the poor and the indigent [FN#538] and used himself
to distribute his alms to them with his own hand. After this
fashion he won himself great renown in all the realm and the most
of the chiefs of the state and the Amirs used to eat at his table
and swore not but by his precious life. Moreover, he fell to
going everywhile [FN#539] to the chase and the horse course and to
practicing horsemanship and archery [FN#540] before the Sultan,
whilst the Lady Bedrulbudour redoubled in love of him,
whenassoever she saw him disporting himself a horseback, and
thought in herself that God had wrought exceeding graciously by
her in that there had befallen her what befell with the Vizier's
son, so He might keep her for her true bridegroom Alaeddin.
So [FN#541] he went daily waxing in goodliness of repute and in
praise and the love of him redoubled in the hearts of the common
folk and he was magnified in men's eyes.

Now in those days certain of the Sultan's enemies took horse
against him; so he levied troops to repel them and made Alaeddin
chief thereof. Alaeddin set out with his host and fared on till
he drew near the enemy, whose troops were exceeding many; where

Back to Full Books