All Saints' Day and Other SermonsbyCharles Kingsley

SERMONS***


Credit



Transcribed by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk




ALL SAINTS' DAY AND OTHER SERMONS




      "Inheriting the zeal
And from the sanctity of elder times
Not deviating;--a priest, the like of whom
If multiplied, and in their stations set,
Would o'er the bosom of a joyful land
Spread true religion, and her genuine fruits."
The excursion--Book vi.



PREFATORY NOTE {1}



The following Sermons could not be arranged according to any proper 
sequence.  Those, however, which refer to doctrine and the Church Seasons 
will mostly be found at the beginning of the volume, whilst those which 
deal with practical subjects are placed at the close.

A few of the Sermons have already appeared in "Good Words;" but by far 
the greater number were never prepared by their author for the press.  
They were written out very roughly--sometimes at an hour's notice, as 
occasion demanded--and were only intended for delivery from the pulpit.

The original MSS. have been adhered to as closely as possible.

It is thought that many to whom the late Rector of Eversley was dear will 
welcome the publication of these earnest words, and find them helpful in 
the Christian life.

"Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth:  Yea, saith 
the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their works do 
follow them."



SERMON I.  ALL SAINTS' DAY



Westminster Abbey.  November 1, 1874.

Revelation vii. 9-12.  "After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, 
which no man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and 
tongues, stood before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white 
robes, and palms in their hands; and cried with a loud voice, saying, 
Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.  
And all the angels stood round about the throne, and about the elders and 
the four beasts, and fell before the throne on their faces, and 
worshipped God, saying, Amen:  Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and 
thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever 
and ever.  Amen."

To-day is All Saints' Day.  On this day we commemorate--and, as far as 
our dull minds will let us, contemplate--the saints; the holy ones of 
God; the pure and the triumphant--be they who they may, or whence they 
may, or where they may.  We are not bidden to define and limit their 
number.  We are expressly told that they are a great multitude, which no 
man could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and peoples, and tongues; 
and most blessed news that is for all who love God and man.  We are not 
told, again--and I beg you all to mark this well--that this great 
multitude consists merely of those who, according to the popular notion, 
have "gone to heaven," as it is called, simply because they have not gone 
to hell.  Not so, not so!  The great multitude whom we commemorate on All 
Saints' Day, are SAINTS.  They are the holy ones, the heroes and heroines 
of mankind, the elect, the aristocracy of grace.  These are they who have 
kept themselves unspotted from the world.  They are the pure who have 
washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb, which 
is the spirit of self-sacrifice.  They are those who carry the palm-
branch of triumph, who have come out of great tribulation, who have 
dared, and fought, and suffered for God, and truth, and right.  Nay, 
there are those among them, and many, thank God--weak women, too, among 
them--who have resisted unto blood, striving against sin.

And who are easy-going folk like you and me, that we should arrogate to 
ourselves a place in that grand company?  Not so!  What we should do on 
All Saints' Day is to place ourselves, with all humility, if but for an 
hour, where we can look afar off upon our betters, and see what they are 
like, and what they do.

And what are they like, those blessed beings of whom the text speaks?  
The Gospel for this day describes them to us; and we may look on that 
description as complete, for He who gives it is none other than our Lord 
Himself.  "Blessed are the poor in spirit; for their's is the kingdom of 
heaven.  Blessed are they that mourn:  for they shall be comforted.  
Blessed are the meek:  for they shall inherit the earth.  Blessed are 
they who hunger and thirst after righteousness:  for they shall be 
filled.  Blessed are the merciful:  for they shall obtain mercy.  Blessed 
are the pure in heart:  for they shall see God.  Blessed are the peace-
makers:  for they shall be called the children of God.  Blessed are they 
which are persecuted for righteousness' sake:  for their's is the kingdom 
of heaven.  Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, 
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake.  
Rejoice, and be exceeding glad:  for great is your reward in heaven."

This is what they are like; and what we, I fear, too many of us, are not 
like.  But in proportion as we grow like them, by the grace of God, just 
so far shall we enter into the communion of saints, and understand the 
bliss of that everlasting All Saints' Day which St John saw in heaven.

And what do they do, those blessed beings?  Whatever else they do, or do 
not do, this we are told they do--they worship.  They satisfy, it would 
seem, in perfection, that mysterious instinct of devotion--that inborn 
craving to look upward and adore, which, let false philosophy say what it 
will, proves the most benighted idolater to be a man, and not a brute--a 
spirit, and not a merely natural thing.

They have worshipped, and so are blest.  They have hungered and thirsted 
after righteousness, and now they are filled.  They have longed for, 
toiled for, it may be died for, the true, the beautiful, and the good; 
and now they can gaze upward at the perfect reality of that which they 
saw on earth, only as in a glass darkly, dimly, and afar; and can 
contemplate the utterly free, the utterly beautiful, and the utterly good 
in the character of God and the face of Jesus Christ.  They entered while 
on earth into the mystery and the glory of self-sacrifice; and now they 
find their bliss in gazing on the one perfect and eternal sacrifice, and 
rejoicing in the thought that it is the cause and ground of the whole 
universe, even the Lamb slain before the foundation of the world.

I say not that all things are clear to them.  How can they be to any 
finite and created being?  They, and indeed angels and archangels, must 
walk for ever by faith, and not by sight.  But if there be mysteries in 
the universe still hidden from them, they know who has opened the sealed 
book of God's secret counsels, even the Lamb who is the Lion, and the 
Lion who is the Lamb; and therefore, if all things are not clear to them, 
all things at least are bright, for they can trust that Lamb and His 
self-sacrifice.  In Him, and through Him, light will conquer darkness, 
justice injustice, truth ignorance, order disorder, love hate, till God 
be all in all, and pain and sorrow and evil shall have been exterminated 
out of a world for which Christ stooped to die.  Therefore they worship; 
and the very act of worship--understand it well--is that great reward in 
heaven which our Lord promised them.  Adoration is their very bliss and 
life.  It must be so.  For what keener, what nobler enjoyment for 
rational and moral beings, than satisfaction with, and admiration of, a 
Being better than themselves?  Therefore they worship; and their worship 
finds a natural vent in words most fit though few, but all expressing 
utter trust and utter satisfaction in the worthiness of God.  Therefore 
they worship; and by worship enter into communion and harmony not only 
with each other, not only with angels and archangels, but with all the 
powers of nature, the four beings which are around the throne, and with 
every creature which is in heaven and in earth, and under the earth, and 
in the sea.  For them, likewise, St John heard saying, "Blessing and 
glory, and honour, and power, be unto Him that sitteth on the throne, and 
to the Lamb for ever and ever."

And why?  I think, with all humility, that the key to all these hymns--
whether of angels or of men, or of mere natural things--is the first hymn 
of all; the hymn which shows that, however grateful to God for what He 
has done for them those are whom the Lamb has redeemed by His blood to 
God, out of every kindred, and nation, and tongue; yet, nevertheless, the 
hymn of hymns is that which speaks not of gratitude, but of absolute 
moral admiration--the hymn which glorifies God, not for that which He is 
to man, not for that which He is to the universe, but for that which He 
is absolutely and in Himself--that which He was before all worlds, and 
would be still, though the whole universe, all created things, and time, 
and space, and matter, and every created spirit likewise, should be 
annihilated for ever.  And what is that?

"Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come."

Ah! what a Gospel lies within those words!  A Gospel?  Ay, if you will 
receive it, the root of all other possible Gospels, and good news for all 
created beings.  What a Gospel! and what an everlasting fount of comfort!  
Surely of those words it is true, "blessed are they who, going through 
the vale of misery, find therein a well, and the pools are filled with 
water."  Know you not what I mean?  Happier, perhaps, are you--the young 
at least among you--if you do not know.  But some of you must know too 
well.  It is to them I speak.  Were you never not merely puzzled--all 
thinking men are that--but crushed and sickened at moments by the mystery 
of evil?  Sickened by the follies, the failures, the ferocities, the 
foulnesses of mankind, for ages upon ages past?  Sickened by the sins of 
the unholy many--sickened, alas! by the imperfections even of the holiest 
few?  And have you never cried in your hearts with longing, almost with 
impatience, Surely, surely, there is an ideal Holy One somewhere, or else 
how could have arisen in my mind the conception, however faint, of an 
ideal holiness?  But where, oh where?  Not in the world around, strewed 
with unholiness.  Not in myself--unholy too, without and within--seeming 
to myself sometimes the very worst company of all the bad company I meet, 
because it is the only bad company from which I cannot escape.  Oh, is 
there a Holy One, whom I may contemplate with utter delight? and if so, 
where is He?  Oh, that I might behold, if but for a moment, His perfect 
beauty, even though, as in the fable of Semele of old, the lightning of 
His glance were death.  Nay, more, has it not happened to some here--to 
clergyman, lawyer, physician, perhaps, alas! to some pure-minded, noble-
hearted woman--to be brought in contact perforce with that which truly 
sickens them--with some case of human folly, baseness, foulness--which, 
however much their soul revolts from it, they must handle, they must toil 
over many weeks and months, in hope that that which is crooked may be 
made somewhat straight, till their whole soul was distempered, all but 
degraded, by the continual sight of sin, till their eyes seemed full of 
nothing but the dance of death, and their ears of the gibbering of 
madmen, and their nostrils with the odours of the charnel house, and they 
longed for one breath of pure air, one gleam of pure light, one strain of 
pure music, to wash their spirits clean from those foul elements into 
which their duty had thrust them down perforce?

And then, oh then, has there not come to such an one--I know that it has 
come--that for which his spirit was athirst, the very breath of pure air, 
the very gleam of pure light, the very strain of pure music, for it is 
the very music of the spheres, in those same words, "Holy, holy, holy, 
Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come;" and he has 
answered, with a flush of keenest joy, Yes.  Whatever else is unholy, 
there is an Holy One, spotless and undefiled, serene and self-contained.  
Whatever else I cannot trust, there is One whom I can trust utterly.  
Whatever else I am dissatisfied with, there is One whom I can contemplate 
with utter satisfaction, and bathe my stained soul in that eternal fount 
of purity.  And who is He?  Who save the Cause and Maker, and Ruler of 
all things, past, present, and to come?  Ah, Gospel of all gospels, that 
God Himself, the Almighty God, is the eternal and unchangeable 
realisation of all that I and all mankind, in our purest and our noblest 
moments, have ever dreamed concerning the true, the beautiful, and the 
good.  Even though He slay me, the unholy, yet will I trust in Him.  For 
He is Holy, Holy, Holy, and can do nothing to me, or any creature, save 
what He OUGHT.  For He has created all things, and for His pleasure they 
are and were created.

Whosoever has entered, though but for a moment, however faintly, 
partially, stupidly, into that thought of thoughts, has entered in so far 
into the communion of the elect; and has had his share in the everlasting 
All Saints' Day which is in heaven.  He has been, though but for a 
moment, in harmony with the polity of the Living God, the heavenly 
Jerusalem; and with an innumerable company of angels, and the church of 
the first-born who are written in heaven; and with the spirits of just 
men made perfect, and with all past, present, and to come, in this and in 
all other worlds, of whom it is written, "Blessed are the poor in spirit:  
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.  Blessed are they who hunger and 
thirst after righteousness:  for they shall be filled.  Blessed are the 
pure in heart:  for they shall see God.  Blessed are they who are 
persecuted for righteousness' sake:  for their's is the kingdom of 
heaven."  Great indeed is their reward, for it is no less than the very 
beatific vision to contemplate and adore.  That supreme moral beauty, of 
which all earthly beauty, all nature, all art, all poetry, all music, are 
but phantoms and parables, hints and hopes, dim reflected rays of the 
clear light of that everlasting day, of which it is written--that "the 
city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it:  for 
the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof."



SERMON II.  PREPARATION FOR ADVENT



Westminster Abbey.  November 15, 1874.

Amos iv. 12.  "Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel."

We read to-day, for the first lesson, parts of the prophecy of Amos.  
They are somewhat difficult, here and there, to understand; but 
nevertheless Amos is perhaps the grandest of the Hebrew prophets, next to 
Isaiah.  Rough and homely as his words are, there is a strength, a 
majesty, and a terrible earnestness in them, which it is good to listen 
to; and specially good now that Advent draws near, and we have to think 
of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and what His coming means.  
"Prepare to meet thy God," says Amos in the text.  Perhaps he will tell 
us how to meet our God.

Amos is specially the poor man's prophet, for he was a poor man himself; 
not a courtier like Isaiah, or a priest like Jeremiah, or a sage like 
Daniel; but a herdsman and a gatherer of sycamore fruit in Tekoa, near 
Bethlehem, where Amos was born.  Yet to this poor man, looking after 
sheep and cattle on the downs, and pondering on the wrongs and misery 
around, the word of the Lord came, and he knew that God had spoken to 
him, and that he must go and speak to men, at the risk of his life, what 
God had bidden, against all the nations round and their kings, and 
against the king and nobles and priests of Israel, and the king and 
nobles and priests of Judah, and tell them that the day of the Lord is at 
hand, and that they must prepare to meet their God.  And he said what he 
felt he must say with a noble freedom, with a true independence such as 
the grace of God alone can give.  Amaziah, the priest of Bethel, who was 
worshipping (absurd as it may seem to us) God and the golden calf at the 
same time in King Jeroboam's court, complained loudly, it would seem, of 
Amos's plain speaking.  How uncourteous to prophesy that Jeroboam should 
die by the sword, and Israel be carried captive out of their own land!  
Let him go home into his own land of Judah, and prophesy there; but not 
prophesy at Bethel, for it was the king's chapel and the king's court.  
Amos went, I presume, in fear of his life.  But he left noble words 
behind him.  "I was no prophet," he said to Amaziah, "nor a prophet's 
son, but a herdsman, and a gatherer of wild figs.  And the Lord took me 
as I followed the flock, and said, Go, prophesy unto my people Israel."  
And then he turned on that smooth court-priest Amaziah, and pronounced 
against him, in the name of the Lord, a curse too terrible to be repeated 
here.

Now what was the secret of this inspired herdsman's strength?  What 
helped him to face priests, nobles, and kings?  What did he believe?  
What did he preach?  He believed and preached the kingdom of God and His 
righteousness; the simple but infinite difference between right and 
wrong; and the certain doom of wrong, if wrong was persisted in.  He 
believed in the kingdom of God.  He told the kings and the people of all 
the nations round, that they had committed cruel and outrageous sins, not 
against the Jews merely, but against each other.  In the case of Moab, 
the culminating crime was an insult to the dead.  He had burned the bones 
of the king of Edom into lime.  In the case of Ammon, it was brutal 
cruelty to captive women; but in the cases of Gaza, of Tyre, and of Edom, 
it was slave-making and slave-trading invasions of Palestine.  "Thus 
saith the Lord:  For three transgressions of Gaza, and for four, I will 
not turn away the punishment thereof; because they carried away captive 
the whole captivity, to deliver them up to Edom.  But I will send a fire 
upon the wall of Gaza, which shall devour the palaces thereof."

Yes.  Slave-hunting and slave-trading wars--that was and is an iniquity 
which the just and merciful Ruler of the earth would not, and will not, 
pardon.  And honour to those who, as in Africa of late, put down those 
foul deeds, wheresoever they are done; who, at the risk of their own 
lives, dare free the captives from their chains; and who, if interfered 
with in their pious work, dare execute on armed murderers and manstealers 
the vengeance of a righteous God.  For the Lord God was their King, and 
their Judge, whether they knew it or not.  And for three transgressions 
of theirs, and for four, the Lord would not turn away their punishment, 
but would send fire and sword among them, and they should be carried away 
captive, as they had carried others away.  But to go back.  Amos next 
turns to his own countrymen--to Judah and Israel, who were then two 
separate nations.  For three transgressions of Judah, and for four, the 
Lord would not turn away their punishment, because they had despised the 
law of the Lord, and had not walked in His commandments.  Therefore He 
would send a fire on Judah, and it should devour the palaces of 
Jerusalem.  But Amos is most bitter against Israel, against the court of 
King Jeroboam at Samaria, and against the rich men of Israel, the bulls 
of Bashan, as he calls them.  For three transgressions, and for four, the 
Lord would not turn away their punishment.  And why?

Now see what I meant when I said that Amos believed not only in the 
kingdom of God, but in the righteousness of God.  It was not merely that 
they were worshipping idols--golden calves at Dan, and Bethel, and 
Samaria, at the same time that they worshipped the true God.  That was 
bad, but there was more behind.  These men were bad, proud, luxurious, 
cruel; they were selling their countrymen for slaves--selling, he says so 
twice, as if it was some notorious and special case, an honest man for 
silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes.  They were lying down on 
clothes taken on pledge by every altar.  They were breaking the seventh 
commandment in an abominable way.  They were falsifying weights and 
measures, and selling the refuse of the wheat.  They stored up the fruits 
of violence and robbery in their palaces.  They hated him who rebuked 
them, and abhorred him that spoke uprightly.  They trod upon the poor and 
crushed the needy, and then said to their stewards, "Bring wine, and let 
us drink."  Therefore though they had built houses of hewn stone, they 
should not live in them.  They had planted pleasant vineyards, but should 
not drink of them.  And all the while these superstitious and wicked rich 
men were talking of the day of the Lord, and hoping that the day of the 
Lord would appear.

You, if you have read your Bibles carefully and reverently, must surely 
be aware that the day of the Lord, either in the Old Testament or in the 
New, does not mean merely the final day of judgment, but any striking 
event, any great crisis in the world's history, which throws a divine 
light upon that history, and shows to men--at least to those who have 
eyes wherewith to see--that verily there is a God who judges the earth in 
righteousness, and ministers true judgment among the people;--a God whom 
men, and all their institutions, should always be prepared to meet, lest 
coming suddenly, He find them sleeping.  If you are not aware of this, 
the real meaning of a day of the Lord, a day of the Son of Man, let me 
entreat you to go and search the Scriptures for yourselves; for in them 
ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of the 
Lord, of that Eternal Son of whom the second Psalm speaks, in words which 
mobs and tyrants, the atheist and the superstitious, are alike willing to 
forget.

In the time of Amos, the rich tyrants of Israel seem to have meant by the 
day of the Lord some vague hope that, in those dark and threatening 
times, God would interfere to save them, if they were attacked by foreign 
armies.  But woe to you that desire the day of the Lord, says Amos the 
herdsman.  What do you want with it?  You will find it very different 
from what you expect.  There is a day of the Lord coming, he says, 
therefore prepare to meet your God.  But you are unprepared, and you will 
find the day of the Lord very different from what you expect.  It will be 
a day in which you will learn the righteousness of God.  Because He is 
righteous He will not suffer your unrighteousness.  Because He is good, 
He will not permit you to be bad.  The day of the Lord to you will be 
darkness and not light, not as you dream deliverance from the invaders, 
but ruin by the invaders, from which will be no escape.  "As if a man did 
flee from a lion, and a bear met him; or went into the house and leaned 
his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him."  There will be no escape 
for those wicked men.  Though they dug into hell, God's hand would take 
them; though they climbed up into heaven, God would fetch them down; 
though they hid in the bottom of the sea, God would command the serpent, 
and it should bite them.  He would sift the house of Israel among all 
nations like corn in a sieve, and not a grain should fall to the earth.  
And all the sinners among God's people should die by the sword, who say, 
"The evil shall not overtake us."

This was Amos's notion of the kingdom of God and His righteousness.  
These Israelites would not obey the laws of God's kingdom, and be 
righteous and good.  But Amos told them, they could not get rid of God's 
kingdom.  The Lord was King, in spite of them, and they would find it out 
to their sorrow.  If they would not seek His kingdom and His government, 
His government would seek them and find them, and find their evil-doings 
out.  If they would not seek God's righteousness, His righteousness would 
seek them, and execute righteous judgment on them.  No wonder that the 
Israelites thought Amos a most troublesome and insolent person.  No 
wonder that the smooth priest Amaziah begged him to begone and talk in 
that way somewhere else.  He saw plainly enough that either Amos must 
leave Samaria, or he must leave it.  The two could no more work together 
than fire and water.  Amos wanted to make men repent of their sins, while 
Amaziah wanted only to make them easy in their minds; and no man can do 
both at once.

So it was then, my friends, and so it will be till the end of this wicked 
world.  The way to please men, and be popular, always was, and always 
will be, Amaziah's way; to tell men that they may worship God and the 
golden calf at the same time, that they may worship God and money, 
worship God and follow the ways of this wicked world which suit their 
fancy and their interest; to tell them the kingdom of God is not over you 
now, Christ is not ruling the world now; that the kingdom of God will 
only come, when Christ comes at the last day, and meanwhile, if people 
will only believe what they are told, and live tolerably respectable 
lives, they may behave in all things else as if there was no God, and no 
judgments of God.  Seeking the righteousness of God, say these preachers 
of Amaziah's school, only means, that if Christ's righteousness is 
imputed to you need not be righteous yourselves, but will go to heaven 
without having been good men here on earth.  That is the comfortable 
message which the world delights to hear, and for which the world will 
pay a high price to its flatterers.

But if any man dares to tell his fellow-men what Amos told them, and say, 
The kingdom of God is among you, and within you, and over you, whether 
you like or not, and you are in it; the Lord is King, be the people never 
so unquiet; and all power is given to Him in heaven and earth already; 
and at the last great day, when He comes in glory, He will show that He 
has been governing the world and the inhabitants thereof all along, 
whether they cared to obey Him or not:--if he tell men, that the 
righteousness of God means this--to pray for the Spirit of God and of 
Christ, that they may be perfect as their Father in heaven is perfect, 
and holy as Christ is holy, for without holiness no man shall see the 
Lord:  if he tell men, that the wrath of God was revealed from heaven at 
the fall of man, and has been revealed continuously ever since, against 
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, that indignation and wrath, 
tribulation and anguish will fall upon every soul of man that doeth evil; 
and glory, honour, and peace to every man that worketh good:--when a man 
dares to preach that, he is no more likely to be popular with the wicked 
world (for it is a wicked world) than Amos was popular, or St Paul was 
popular, or our Lord Jesus Christ, who gave both to Amos and to St Paul 
their messages, was popular.  False preachers will dislike that man, 
because he wishes to make sinners uneasy, while they wish to make them 
easy.  Philosophers, falsely so-called, will dislike that man, because he 
talks of the kingdom of God, the providence of God, and they are busy--at 
least, just now--in telling men that there is no providence and no God--
at least, no living God.  The covetous and worldly will dislike that man, 
for they believe that the world is governed, not by God, but by money.  
Politicians will dislike that man, because they think that not God, but 
they, govern the world, by those very politics and knavish tricks, which 
we pray God to confound, whenever we sing "God save the Queen."  And the 
common people--the masses--who ought to hear such a man gladly, for his 
words are to them, if they would understand them, a gospel, and good news 
of divine hope and deliverance from sin and ignorance, oppression and 
misery--the masses, I say, will dislike that man, because he tells them 
that God's will is law, and must be obeyed at all risks:  and the poor 
fools have got into their heads just now that not God's will, but the 
will of the people, is law, and that not the eternal likeness of God, but 
whatever they happen to decide by the majority of the moment, is right.

And so such a preacher will not be popular with the many.  They will 
dismiss him, at best, as they might a public singer or lecturer, with 
compliments and thanks, and so excuse themselves from doing what he tells 
them.  And he must look for his sincere hearers in the hearts of those--
and there are such, I verily believe, in this congregation--who have a 
true love and a true fear of Christ, their incarnate God--who believe, 
indeed, that Christ is their King, and the King of all the earth; who 
think that to please Him is the most blessed, as well as the most 
profitable, thing which man can do; to displease Him the most horrible, 
as well as the most dangerous, thing which man can do; and who, 
therefore, try to please Him by becoming like Him, by really renouncing 
the world and all its mean and false and selfish ways, and putting on His 
new pattern of man, which is created after God's likeness in 
righteousness and true holiness.  Blessed are they, for of them it is 
written, "Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after 
righteousness, for they shall be filled."  Even Christ Himself shall fill 
them.  Blessed are they, and all that they take in hand, for of them it 
is written, "Blessed are all they that fear the Lord, and walk in His 
ways.  For thou shalt eat the labours of thine hands."  "The Lord is 
righteous in all His ways, and holy in all His works.  The Lord is nigh 
unto all them that call upon Him, yea, all such as call upon Him 
faithfully.  He will fulfil the desire of them that fear Him.  He also 
will hear their cry"--ay, "and will help them."

Happy, ay, blest will such souls be, let the day of the Lord appear when 
it will, or how it will.  It may appear--the day of the Lord, as it has 
appeared again and again in history--in the thunder of some mighty war.  
It may appear after some irresistible, though often silent revolution, 
whether religious or intellectual, social or political.  It will appear 
at last, as that great day of days, which will conclude, so we believe, 
the drama of human history, and all men shall give account for their own 
works.  But, however and whenever it shall appear, they at least will 
watch its dawning, neither with the selfish assurance of modern 
Pharisaism, nor with the abject terror of mediaeval superstition; but 
with that manful faith with which he who sang the 98th Psalm saw the day 
of the Lord dawn once in the far east, more than two thousand years ago, 
and cried with solemn joy, in the glorious words which you have just 
heard sung--words which the Church of England has embodied in her daily 
evening service, in order, I presume, to show her true children how they 
ought to look at days of judgment; and so prepare to meet their God:--

"Show yourselves joyful unto the Lord, all ye lands:  sing, rejoice, and 
give thanks.

"Let the sea make a noise, and all that therein is:  the round world, and 
they that dwell therein.

"Let the floods clap their hands, and let the hills be joyful together 
before the Lord:  for He cometh to judge the earth.

"With righteousness shall He judge the world:  and the people with 
equity.

"Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost;

"As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end.  
Amen."



SERMON III.  THE PURIFYING HOPE



Eversley, 1869.  Windsor Castle, 1869.

1 John iii. 2.  "Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet 
appear what we shall be:  but we know that, when he shall appear, we 
shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is.  And every man that 
hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure."

Let us consider this noble text, and see something, at least, of what it 
has to tell us.  It is, like all God's messages, all God's laws, ay, like 
God's world in which we live and breathe, at once beautiful and awful; 
full of life-giving hope; but full, too, of chastening fear.  Hope for 
the glorious future which it opens to poor human beings like us; fear, 
lest so great a promise being left us, we should fall short of it by our 
own fault.  Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed on us, 
that we should be called the sons of God.

There is the root and beginning of all Christianity,--of all true 
religion.  We are the sons of God, and the infinite, absolute, eternal 
Being who made this world, and all worlds, is our Father.  We are the 
children of God.  It is not for us to say who are not God's children.  
That is God's concern, not ours.  All that we have to do with, is the 
awful and blessed fact that we are.  We were baptised into God's kingdom, 
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.  Let us 
believe the Gospel and good news which baptism brings us, and say each of 
us;--Not for our own goodness and deserving; not for our own faith or 
assurance; not for anything which we have thought, felt, or done, but 
simply out of the free grace and love of God, seeking out us unconscious 
infants, we are children of God.  "Beloved now are we the sons of God, 
and it doth not yet appear what we shall be."  It doth not yet appear 
what the next life will be like, or what we shall be like in it.  That 
there will be a next life,--that death does not end all for us, the New 
Testament tells us.  Yea, our own hearts and reasons tell us.  That 
sentiment of immortality, that instinct that the death of our body will 
not, cannot destroy our souls, or ourselves--all men have had that, 
except a few; and it is a question whether they had it not once, and have 
only lost it by giving way to their brute animal nature.  But be that as 
it may, it concerns us, I think, very little.  For we at least believe 
that we shall live again.  That we shall live again in some state or 
other, is as certain to our minds as it was to the minds of our 
forefathers, even while they were heathens; as certain to us as it is 
that we are alive now.  But in that future state, what we shall be like, 
we know not.  St. John says that he did not know; and we certainly have 
no more means of knowing than St. John.

Therefore let us not feed our fancies with pictures of what the next 
world will be like,--pictures, I say, which are but waking dreams of men, 
intruding into those things which they have not seen, vainly puffed up in 
their fleshly minds--that is in their animal and mortal brain.  Let us be 
content with what St. John tells us, which is a matter not for our 
brains, but for our hearts; not for our imaginations, but for our 
conscience, which is indeed our highest reason.  Whatever we do not know 
about the next world, this, he says, we do know,--that when God in Christ 
shall appear, we shall be like Him.  Like God.  No more:  No:  but no 
less.  To be like God, it appears, is the very end and aim of our being.  
That we might be like God, God our Father sent us forth from His eternal 
bosom, which is the ground of all life, in heaven and in earth.  That we 
might be like God, He clothed us in mortal flesh, and sent us into this 
world of sense.  That we might be like God, He called us, from our 
infancy, into His Church.  That we might be like God, He gave us the 
divine sense of right and wrong; and more, by the inspiration of His holy 
spirit, that inward witness, that Light of God, which lightens every man 
that cometh into the world, He taught us to love the right and hate the 
wrong.  That we might be like God, God is educating us from our cradle to 
our grave, by every event, even the smallest, which happens to us.  That 
we might be like God, it is in God that we live, and move, and have our 
being; that as the raindrop which falls from heaven, rises again surely, 
soon or late, to heaven again; so each soul of man, coming forth from God 
at first, should return again to God, as many of them as have eternal 
life, having become like to God from whom it came at first.  And how 
shall we become like God? or rather like Christ who is both God and man?  
To become like God the Father,--that is impossible for finite and created 
beings as we are.  But to become somewhat, at least, like God the Son, 
like Jesus Christ our Lord, who is the brightness of His Father's glory, 
and the express image of His person, that is not impossible.  For He has 
revealed Himself as a man, in the soul and body of a man, that our sinful 
souls might be made like His pure soul; our sinful bodies like His 
glorious body; and that so He might be the first born among many 
brethren.  And how?  "We know that when He appears, we shall be like Him, 
for we shall see Him as He is."

For we shall see Him as He is.  Herein is a great mystery, and one which 
I do not pretend to fathom.  Only this I can try to do--to shew how it 
may seem possible and reasonable, from what is called analogy, that is by 
judging of an unknown thing from a known thing, which is, at least, 
something like it.  Now do we not all know how apt we are to become like 
those whom we see, with whom we spend our hours--and, above all, like 
those whom we admire and honour?  For good and for evil, alas!  For evil-
-for those who associate with evil or frivolous persons are too apt to 
catch not only their low tone, but their very manner, their very 
expression of face, speaking, and thinking, and acting.  Not only do they 
become scornful, if they live with scorners; false, if they live with 
liars; mean, if they live with covetous men; but they will actually catch 
the very look of their faces.  The companions of affected, frivolous 
people, men or women, grow to look affected frivolous.  Indulging in the 
same passions, they mould their own countenances and their very walk, 
also the very tones of their voice, as well as their dress, into the 
likeness of those with whom they associate, nay, of those whose fashions 
(as they are called) they know merely by books and pictures.  But thank 
God, who has put into the hearts of Christian people the tendency towards 
God--just in the same way does good company tend to make men good; high-
minded company to make them high-minded; kindly company to make them 
kindly; modest company to make them modest; honourable company to make 
them honourable; and pure company to make them pure.  If the young man or 
woman live with such, look up to such as their ideal, that is, the 
pattern which they ought to emulate--then, as a fact, the Spirit of God 
working in them does mould them into something of the likeness of those 
whom they admire and love.  I have lived long enough to see more than one 
man of real genius stamp his own character, thought, even his very manner 
of speaking, for good or for evil, on a whole school or party of his 
disciples.  It has been said, and truly, I believe, that children cannot 
be brought up among beautiful pictures,--I believe, even among any 
beautiful sights and sounds,--without the very expression of their faces 
becoming more beautiful, purer, gentler, nobler; so that in them are 
fulfilled the words of the great and holy Poet concerning the maiden 
brought up according to God, and the laws of God--


   "And she shall bend her ear
   In many a secret place,
Where rivulets dance their wayward round,
And beauty, born of murmuring sound,
   Shall pass into her face."


But if mere human beings can have this "personal influence," as it is 
called, over each others' characters, if even inanimate things, if they 
be beautiful, can have it--what must be the personal influence of our 
Lord Jesus Christ?  Of Him, who is the Man of all men, the Son of Man, 
the perfect and ideal Man--and more, who is very God of very God; the 
Author of all life, power, wisdom, genius, in every human being, whether 
they use to good, or abuse to ill, His divine gifts; the Author, too, of 
all natural beauty, from the sun over our heads to the flower beneath our 
feet?  Think of that steadily, accurately, rationally.  Think of who 
Christ is, and what Christ is--and then think what His personal influence 
must be--quite infinite, boundless, miraculous.  So that the very 
blessedness of heaven will not be merely the sight of our Lord; it will 
be the being made holy, and kept holy, by that sight.  If only we be fit 
for it.  For let us ask ourselves the question,--If St John's words come 
true of us, if we should see Him as He is, would the sight of His all-
glorious countenance warm us into such life, love, longing for virtue and 
usefulness, as we never felt before?  Or would it crush us into the very 
earth with utter shame and humiliation, full and awful knowledge of how 
weak and foolish, sinful and unworthy we were?--as it does to Gerontius 
in the poem, when he dreams that, after death, he demanded, rashly and 
ambitiously, to see our Lord, and had his wish.

That is the question which every one must try to answer for himself in 
fear and trembling, for, he that hath this hope in Him purifieth himself, 
even as He is pure.  The common sense of men--which is often their 
conscience and highest reason--has taught them this, more or less 
clearly, in all countries and all ages.  There are very few religions 
which have not made purifying of some kind a part of their duty.  The 
very savage, when he enters (as he fancies) the presence of his god, will 
wash and adorn himself that he may be fit, poor creature, for meeting the 
paltry god which he has invented out of his own brain; and he is right as 
far as he goes.  The Englishman, when he dresses himself in his best to 
go to church, obeys the same reasonable instinct.  And, indeed, is not 
holy baptism a sign that this instinct is a true one?--that if God be 
pure, he who enters the presence of God must purify himself, even as God 
is pure?  Else why, when each person, whether infant or adult, is 
received into Christ's Church, is washing with water, whether by 
sprinkling, as now, or, as of old, by immersion, the very sign and 
sacrament of his being received into God's kingdom?  The instinct, I say, 
is reasonable, and has its root in the very heart of man.  Whatsoever we 
respect and admire we shall also try to copy, if it be only for a time.  
If we are going into the presence of a wiser man than ourselves, we shall 
surely recollect and summon up what little wisdom or knowledge we may 
have; if into the presence of a holier person, we shall try to call up in 
ourselves those better and more serious thoughts which we so often 
forget, that we may be, even for a few minutes, fit for that good 
company.  And if we go into the presence of a purer person than 
ourselves, we shall surely (unless we be base and brutal) call up our 
purest and noblest thoughts, and try to purify ourselves, even as they 
are pure.  It is true what poets have said again and again, that there 
are women whose mere presence, whose mere look, drives all bad thoughts 
away--women before whom men dare no more speak, or act, nay, even think, 
basely, than they would dare before the angels of God.

But if it be so--and so it is--what must we be, to be fit to appear 
before Him who is Purity itself?--before that spotless Christ in whom is 
no sin and who knows what is in man; who is quick and piercing as a two-
edged sword, even to the dividing asunder of the joints and marrow, so 
that all things are naked and open in the sight of Him with whom we have 
to do?  What purity can we bring into His presence which will not seem 
impure to Him?  What wisdom which will not seem folly?  What humility 
which will not seem self-conceit?  What justice which will not seem 
unjust?  What love which will not seem hardness of heart, in the sight of 
Him who charges His angels with folly, and the very heavens are not clean 
in His sight?  Who loved Him better, and whom did He love better, than St 
John?  Yet, what befel St John when, in the spirit, he saw Him even 
somewhat as He is?--"And I fell at His feet as dead."  If St John himself 
was struck down with awe, what shall we feel, even the best and purest 
among us?  All we can do is to cast ourselves, now and for ever, in life, 
in death, and in the day of judgment, on His boundless mercy and love--
who stooped from heaven to die for us and cry, God be merciful to me a 
sinner.

Therefore, I have many fears for some who are ready enough to talk of 
their fulness of hope and their assurance of salvation, and to join in 
hymns which express weariness of this life and longings for the joys of 
heaven, and prayers that they may depart and be with Christ.  If they are 
not in earnest in such words they mock God; but if they are in earnest, 
some of them, I fear much, tempt God.  What if He took them at their 
word?  What if He gave them their wish?  What if they departed and 
entered the presence of Christ, only to meet with a worse fate than that 
of Gerontius?  Only to be overwhelmed with shame and terror, because, 
though they have been talking of being with Christ, they have not been 
trying to be like Christ; because they have not sought after holiness, 
without which no man shall see the Lord; because they have not tried to 
purify themselves, even as He is pure; and have, poor, heedless souls, 
gone out of the world, with all their sins upon their head, to enter a 
place for which they will find themselves utterly unfit, because it is a 
place into which nothing can enter which defileth, or committeth 
abomination, or maketh a lie, and from which the covetous are specially 
excluded; and in which will be fulfilled the parable of the man who came 
to the feast, not having on a wedding garment,--Take him, bind him hand 
and foot, and cast him into the outer darkness.  There shall be wailing 
and gnashing of teeth.

Assurance, my friends, may be reasonable enough when it is founded on 
repentance and hatred of evil, and love and practice of what is good.  
But, again, assurance may be as unreasonable as it is offensive.  We 
blame a man who has too much assurance about earthly things.  Let us 
beware that we have not too much assurance about heavenly things.  For 
our assurance will surely be too great, unreasonable, built upon the 
sand, if it be built on mere self-conceit of our own orthodoxy, and our 
own privileges, or our own special connection with God.

Meanwhile it has been my comfort to meet with some--would God they were 
more numerous--who, instead of talking of their assurance of salvation, 
lived in a state of noble self-discontent and holy humility; who could 
see nothing but their own faults and failings; who, though they were 
holier than others, considered themselves as unholy; though they were 
doing more good than others, thought themselves useless; whose standard 
of duty was so lofty, that they could think of nothing, but how far they 
had failed in reaching it; who measured themselves, not by other men, but 
by Christ Himself; and, doing that, had nought to say, save, "God be 
merciful to me a sinner."  And for such people I have had full assurance, 
just because they had no assurance themselves.  And I have said in my 
heart, These are worthy, just because they think themselves unworthy.  
These are fit to appear in the presence of God, just because they believe 
themselves unfit.  These are they who will cry at the day of judgment, in 
wondering humility,--Lord, when saw we Thee hungry, or thirsty, or naked, 
or in prison, and visited Thee?  And will receive for answer,--"Inasmuch 
as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have 
done it unto Me."  "Thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will 
make thee ruler over many things.  Enter into the joy of thy Lord."

To which end may God of His mercy bring us, and all we love.  Amen.



SERMON IV.  THE LORD COMING TO HIS TEMPLE



Westminster Abbey.  November, 1874.

Malachi iii. 1, 2.  "The Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to His 
temple. . . .  But who may abide the day of His coming? and who shall 
stand when He appeareth? for He is like a refiner's fire, and like 
fuller's sope."

We believe that this prophecy was fulfilled at the first coming of our 
Lord Jesus Christ.  We believe that it will be fulfilled again, in that 
great day when He shall judge the quick and the dead.  But it is of 
neither of these events I wish to speak to you just now.  I wish to speak 
of an event which has not (as far as we know) happened; which will 
probably never happen; but which is still perfectly possible; and one, 
too, which it is good for us to face now and then, and ask ourselves, If 
this thing came to pass, what should I think, and what should I do?

I shall touch the question with all reverence and caution.  I shall try 
to tread lightly, as one who is indeed on hallowed ground.  For the 
question which I have dared to ask you and myself is none other than 
this--If the Lord suddenly came to this temple, or any other in this 
land; if He appeared among us, as He did in Judea eighteen hundred years 
ago, what should we think of Him?  Should we recognise, or should we 
reject, our Saviour and our Lord?  It is an awful thought, the more we 
look at it.  But for that very reason it may be the more fit to be asked, 
once and for all.

Now, to put this question safely and honestly, we must keep within those 
words which I just said--as He appeared in Judea eighteen hundred years 
ago.  We must limit our fancy to the historic Christ, to the sayings, 
doings, character which are handed down to us in the four Gospels; and 
ask ourselves nothing but--What should I think if such a personage were 
to meet me now?  To imagine Him--as has been too often done--as doing 
deeds, speaking words, and even worse, entertaining motives, which are 
not written in the four Gospels, is as unfair morally, as it is illogical 
critically.  It creates a phantom, a fictitious character, and calls that 
Christ.  It makes each writer, each thinker--or rather dreamer--however 
shallow his heart and stupid his brain--and all our hearts are but too 
shallow, and all our brains too stupid--the measure of a personage so 
vast and so unique, that all Christendom for eighteen hundred years has 
seen in Him, and we of course hold seen truly, the Incarnate God.  No; we 
must think of nothing save what is set down in Holy Writ.

And yet, alas! we cannot use in our days, that which eighteen hundred 
years ago was the most simple and obvious test of our Lord's 
truthfulness, namely His miraculous powers.  The folly and sin of man 
have robbed us of what is, as it were, one of the natural rights of 
reasoning, man.  Lying prodigies and juggleries, forged and pretended 
miracles, even--oh, shame!--imitations of His most sacred wounds, have, 
up to our own time, made all rational men more and more afraid of aught 
which seems to savour of the miraculous; till most of us, I think, would 
have to ask forgiveness--as I myself should have to ask,--if, tantalized 
and insulted again and again by counterfeit miracles, we failed to 
recognise real miracles, and Him who performed them.  Therefore, for good 
or evil, we should be driven back upon that test alone, which, after all, 
perhaps, is the most sure as well as the most convincing--the moral test-
-the test of character.  What manner of personage would He be did He 
condescend to appear among us?  Of that, thank God, the Gospels ought to 
leave us in no doubt.  What acts He might condescend to perform, what 
words He might condescend to speak, it is not for such beings as we to 
guess.  But how He would demean Himself we know; for Holy Writ has told 
us how He demeaned Himself in Judea eighteen hundred years ago; and He is 
the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever, and can be only like Himself.  
But should we know Him merely by His bearing and character?  Should we 
see in Him an utterly ideal personage--The Son of Man, and therefore, ere 
we lost sight of Him once more, the Son of God?  Let us think.  First, 
therefore, we must believe that--as in Judea of old--Christ would meet 
men with all consideration and courtesy.  He would not break the bruised 
reed, nor quench the smoking flax.  He would not strive, nor cry, nor let 
His voice be heard in the streets.  He would not cause any of God's 
little ones to offend, to stumble.  In plain words, He would not shock 
and repel them by any conduct of His.  Therefore, as in Judea of old, He 
would be careful of, even indulgent to, the usages of society, as long as 
they were innocent.  He would never outrage the code of manners, however 
imperfect, however conventional, which this or any other civilised nation 
may have agreed on, to express and keep up respect, self-restraint, 
delicacy, of man toward man, of man toward woman, of the young ward the 
old, of the living toward the dead.  No.

As I said just now, He would never cause, by any act or word of His, one 
of God's little ones to stumble and fall away.

I used just now that word MANNERS.  Let me beg your very serious 
attention to it.  I use it, remember, in its true, its ancient--that is, 
in its moral and spiritual sense.  I use it as the old Greeks, the old 
Romans, used their corresponding words; as our wise forefathers used it, 
when they said well, that "Manners maketh man;" that manners are at once 
the efficient cause of a man's success, and the proof of his deserving to 
succeed:  the outward and visible sign of whatsoever inward and spiritual 
grace, or disgrace, there may be in him.  I mean by the word what our 
Lord meant when He reproved the pushing and vulgar arrogance of the 
Scribes and Pharisees, and laid down the golden rule of all good manners, 
"Whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister; and 
whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant."

Next, I beg you to remember that all, or almost all, good manners which 
we have among us--courtesies, refinements, self-restraint, and mutual 
respect--all which raises us, socially and morally, above our forefathers 
of fifteen hundred years ago--deep-hearted men, valiant and noble, but 
coarse, and arrogant, and quarrelsome--all that, or almost all, we owe to 
Christ, to the influence of His example, and to that Bible which 
testifies of Him.  Yes, the Bible has been for Christendom, in the 
cottage as much as in the palace, the school of manners; and the saying 
that he who becomes a true Christian becomes a true gentleman, is no 
rhetorical boast, but a solid historic fact.

Now imagine Christ to reappear on earth, with that perfect outward beauty 
of character--with what Greeks and Romans, and our own ancestors, would 
have called those perfect manners--which, if we are to believe the 
Gospels, He shewed in Judea of old, which won then so many hearts, 
especially of the common people, sounder judges often of true nobility 
than many who fancy themselves their betters.  Conceive--but which of us 
can conceive?--His perfect tenderness, patience, sympathy, graciousness, 
and grace, combined with perfect strength, stateliness, even awfulness, 
when awe was needed.  Remember that, if, again, the Gospels are to be 
believed.  He alone, of all personages of whom history tells us, solved 
in His own words and deeds the most difficult paradox of human character-
-to be at once utterly conscious, and yet utterly unconscious, of self; 
to combine with perfect self-sacrifice a perfect self-assertion.  Whether 
or not His being able to do that proved Him to have been that which He 
was, the Son of God, it proves Him at least to have been the Son of Man--
the unique and unapproachable ideal of humanity, utterly inspired by the 
Holy Spirit of God.

But again:  He condescended, in His teaching of old, to the level of 
Jewish, knowledge at that time.  We may, therefore, believe that He would 
condescend to the level of our modern knowledge; and what would that 
involve?  It would leave Him, however less than Himself, at least master 
of all that the human race has thought or discovered in the last eighteen 
hundred years.  Think of that.  And think again, that if He condescended, 
as in Judea of old, to employ that knowledge in teaching men--He who knew 
what was in man, and needed not that any should bear witness to Him of 
man--He would manifest a knowledge of human nature to which that of a 
Shakspeare would be purblind and dull; a knowledge of which the Scripture 
nobly says that "The Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than 
any two-edged sword, even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and 
of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents 
of the heart;" so that all "things are naked and opened unto the eyes of 
Him with whom we have to do."  And consider that, in the light of that 
knowledge, He might adapt himself as perfectly to us of this great city, 
as He did to the villagers of Galilee, or to the townsmen of Jerusalem.

Consider, again, that He who spoke as never man yet spake in Jerusalem, 
might speak as man never yet spoke on English soil; that He who was 
listened to gladly once, because He spake with authority, and not as the 
scribes, at second hand, and by rule and precedent, might be listened to 
gladly here once more.  For He might speak here, not as we poor scribes 
can speak at best, but with an authority, originality, earnestness, as 
well as an eloquence, which might exercise a fascination, which would be, 
to all with whom He came in contact, what Malachi calls it, "a refiner's 
fire"--most purifying, though often most painful to the very best; a 
fascination which might be to every one who came under its spell a 
veritable Judgment and Day of the Lord, shewing each man with fearful 
clearness to which side he really inclined at heart in the struggle 
between truth and falsehood, good and evil; a fascination, therefore, 
equally attractive to those who wished to do right, and intolerable to 
those who wished to do wrong.

Consider that last thought.  And consider, too, that those to whom the 
fascination of such a personage might be so intolerable, that it might 
turn to utter hate, would probably be those whose moral sense was so 
perverted, that they thought they were doing right when they were doing 
wrong, and speaking truth when they were telling lies.  It is an awful 
thought.  But we know that there were such men, and too many, among the 
scribes and Pharisees of Jerusalem.  And human nature is the same in 
every age.  Be that as it may--however retired His life, He could not 
long be hid.  He would shortly exercise, almost without attempting it, an 
enormous public influence.

But yet, as in Judea of old, would He not be only too successful?  Would 
He not be at once too liberal for some, and too exacting for others?  
Would He not, as in Judea of old, encounter not merely the active envy of 
the vain and the ambitious, which would follow one who spoke as never man 
spoke; not merely the active malignity of those who wish their fellow-
creatures to be bad and not good; not merely the bigotry of every sect 
and party; but that mere restless love of new excitements, and that dull 
fear and suspicion of new truths, and even of old truths in new words, 
which beset the uneducated of every rank and class, and in no age more 
than in our own?  And therefore I must ask, in sober sadness, how long 
would His influence last?  It lasted, we know, in Judea of old, for some 
three years.  And then--.  But I am not going to say that any such 
tragedy is possible now.  It would be an insult to Him; an insult to the 
gracious influences of His Spirit, the gracious teaching of His Church, 
to say that of our generation, however unworthy we may be of our high 
calling in Christ.  And yet, if He had appeared in any country of 
Christendom only four hundred years ago, might He not have endured an 
even more dreadful death than that of the cross?

But doubtless, no personal harm would happen to Him here.  Only there 
might come a day, in which, as in Judea of old, "after He had said these 
things, many were offended, and walked no more with Him:" when his 
hearers and admirers would grow fewer and more few, some through bigotry, 
some through envy, some through fickleness, some through cowardice, till 
He was left alone with a little knot of earnest disciples; who might 
diminish, alas, but too rapidly, when they found at He, as in Judea of 
old, did not intend to become the head of a new sect, and to gratify 
their ambition and vanity by making them His delegates.  And so the 
world, the religious world as well as the rest, might let Him go His way, 
and vanish from the eyes and minds of men, leaving behind little more 
than a regret that one so gifted and so fascinating should have proved--I 
hardly like to say the words, and yet they must be said--so unsafe and so 
unsound a teacher.

I shall not give now the reasons which have led me, and not in haste, to 
this melancholy conclusion.  I shall only say that I have come to it, 
with pain, and shame, and fear.  With shame and fear.  For when I ask you 
the solemn question, Would you know Christ if He came among you? do I not 
ask myself a question which I dare not answer?  How can I tell whether I 
should recognise, after all, my Saviour and my Lord?  How do I know that 
if He said (as He but too certainly might), something which clashed 
seriously with my preconceived notions of what He ought to say, I should 
not be offended, and walk no more with Him?  How do I know that if He 
said, as in Judea of old, "Will ye too go away?" I should answer with St 
Peter, "Lord, to whom shall we go?  Thou hast the words of eternal life, 
and we believe and are sure that thou art the Christ, the Son of the 
living God?"  I dare not ask that question of myself.  How then dare I 
ask it of you?  I know not.  I can only say, "Lord, I believe:  help thou 
mine unbelief."  I know not.  But this I know--that in this or any other 
world, if you or I did recognise Him, it would be with utter shame and 
terror, unless we had studied and had striven to copy either Himself, or 
whatsoever seems to us most like Him.  Yes; to study the good, the 
beautiful, and the true in Him, and wheresoever else we find it--for all 
that is good, beautiful, and true throughout the universe are nought but 
rays from Him, the central sun--to obey St. Paul of old, and "whatsoever 
things are true, venerable, just, pure, lovely, and of good report--if 
there be any virtue and if there be any praise, to think on these 
things,"--on these scattered fragmentary sacraments of Him whose number 
is not two, nor seven, "but seventy-times seven;" that is the way--I 
think, the only way--to be ready to recognise our Saviour, and to prepare 
to meet our God; that He may be to us, too, as a refiner's fire, and 
refine us--our thoughts, our deeds, our characters throughout.

And I think, too, that this is the way, perhaps the only way, to rid 
ourselves of the fancy that we can be accounted righteous before God for 
any works or deservings of our own.  Those in whom that fancy lingers 
must have but a paltry standard of what righteousness is, a mean 
conception of moral--that is, spiritual--perfection.  But those who look 
not inwards, but upwards; not at themselves, but at Christ and all 
spiritual perfection--they become more and more painfully aware of their 
own imperfections.  The beauty of Christ's character shows them the 
ugliness of their own.  His purity shows them their own foulness.  His 
love their own hardness.  His wisdom their own folly.  His strength their 
own weakness.  The higher their standard rises, the lower falls their 
estimate of themselves; till, in utter humiliation and self-distrust, 
they seek comfort ere alone it can be found--in FAITH--in utter faith and 
trust in that very moral perfection of Christ which shames and dazzles 
them, and yet is their only hope.  To trust in Him for themselves and all 
they love.  To trust that, just because Christ is so magnificent, He will 
pity, and not despise, our meanness.  Just because He is so pure, and 
righteous, and true, and lovely, He will appreciate, and not abhor, our 
struggles after purity, righteousness, truth, love, however imperfect, 
however soiled with failure--and with worse.  Just because He is so 
unlike us, He will smile graciously upon out feeblest attempts to be like 
Him.  Just because He has borne the sins and carried the sorrows of 
mankind, therefore those who come to Him He will in no wise cast out.  
Amen.



SERMON V.  ADVENT LESSONS



Westminster Abbey, First Sunday in Advent, 1873.

Romans vii. 22-25.  "I delight in the law of God after the inward man:  
but I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, 
and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members.  
O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this 
death?  I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord."

This is the first Sunday in Advent.  To-day we have prayed that God would 
give us grace to put away the works of darkness, and put on us the armour 
of light.  Next Sunday we shall pray that, by true understanding of the 
Scriptures, we may embrace and hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting 
life.  The Sunday after that the ministers and stewards of God's 
mysteries may prepare His way by turning the hearts of the disobedient to 
the wisdom of the just--the next, that His grace and mercy may speedily 
help and deliver us from the sins which hinder us in running the race set 
before us.  But I do not think that we shall understand those collects, 
or indeed the meaning of Advent itself, or the reason why we keep the 
season of Advent year by year, unless we first understand the prayer 
which we offered up last Sunday, "Stir up, O Lord, the wills of Thy 
faithful people,"--and we shall understand that prayer just in proportion 
as we have in us the Spirit of God, or the spirit of the world, which is 
the spirit of unbelief.

Worldly people say--and say openly, just now--that this prayer is all a 
dream.  They say God will not stir up men's wills to do good any more 
than to do harm.  He leaves men to themselves to get through life as they 
can.  This Heavenly Father of whom you speak will not give His holy 
spirit to those who ask Him.  He does not, as one of your Collects says, 
put into men's minds good desires--they come to a man entirely from 
outside a man, from his early teaching, his youthful impressions, as they 
are called now-a-days.  He does not either give men grace and power to 
put these desires into practice.  That depends entirely on the natural 
strength of a man's character; and that, again, depends principally on 
the state of his brain.  So, says the world, if you wish your own 
character to improve, you must improve it yourself, for God will not 
improve it for you.  But, after all, why should you try to improve? why 
not be content to be just what you are? you did not make yourself, and 
you are not responsible for being merely what God has chosen to make you.

This is what worldly men say, or at least what they believe and act on; 
and this is the reason why there is so little improvement in the world, 
because men do not ask God to improve their hearts and stir up their 
wills.  I say, very little improvement.  Men talk loudly of the 
enlightenment of the age, and the progress of the species, and the spread 
of civilisation, and so forth:  but when I read old books, and compare 
old times with these, I confess I do not see so much of it as all this 
hopeful talk would lead me to expect.  Men in general have grown more 
prudent, more cunning, from long experience.  They have found out that 
certain sins do not pay--that is, they interfere with people's comfort 
and their power of making money, and therefore they prudently avoid them 
themselves, and put them down by law in other men's cases.  Men have 
certainly grown more good-natured, in some countries, in that they 
dislike more than their ancestors did, to inflict bodily torture on human 
beings; but they are just as ready, or even more ready, to inflict on 
those whom they dislike that moral and mental torture which to noble 
souls is worse than any bodily pain.  As for any real improvement in 
human nature--where is it?  There is just as much falsehood, cheating, 
and covetousness, I believe, in the world as ever there was; just as much 
cant and hypocrisy, and perhaps more; just as much envy, hatred, malice 
and all uncharitableness.  Is not the condition of the masses in many 
great cities as degraded and as sad as ever was that of the serfs in the 
middle ages?  Do not the poor still die by tens of thousands of fevers, 
choleras, and other diseases, which we know perfectly how to prevent, and 
yet have not the will to prevent?  Is not the adulteration of food just 
now as scandalous as it is unchecked?  The sins and follies of human 
nature have been repressed in one direction only to break out another.  
And as for open and coarse sin, people complain even now, and I fear with 
justice, that there is more drunkenness in England at this moment than 
there ever was.  So much for our boasted improvement.

Look again at the wars of the world.  Five-and-twenty years ago, one used 
to be told that the human race was grown too wise to go to war any more, 
and that we were to have an advent of universal peace and plenty, and 
since then we have seen some seven great wars, the last the most terrible 
of all,--and ever since, all the nations of Europe have been watching 
each other in distrust and dread, increasing their armaments, working 
often night and day at forging improved engines of destruction, wherewith 
to kill their fellow-men.  Not that I blame that.  It is necessary.  Yes! 
but the hideous thing is, that it should be necessary.  Does that state 
of things look much like progress of the human race?  Can we say that 
mankind is much improved, either in wisdom or in love, while all the 
nations of Europe are spending millions merely to be ready to fight they 
know not whom, they know not why?

No, my good friends, obey the wise man, and clear your minds of cant--
man's pretensions, man's boastfulness, man's power of blinding his own 
eyes to plain facts--above all, to the plain fact that he does not 
succeed, even in this world of which he fancies himself the master, 
because he lives without God in the world.  All this saddens, I had 
almost said, sickens, a thoughtful man, till he turns away from this 
noisy sham improvement of mankind--the wages of sin, which are death, to 
St John's account of the true improvement of mankind, the true progress 
of the species,--the gift of God which is eternal life.  "And I saw a new 
heaven and a new earth:  for the first heaven and the first earth were 
passed away.  And I saw the Holy City--New Jerusalem, coming down from 
God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.  And I 
heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold the tabernacle of God 
is with men, and He will dwell with them, and they shall be His people, 
and God Himself shall be with them, and be their God.  And God shall wipe 
away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither 
sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain:  for the former 
things are passed away."

Does that sound much like a general increase of armaments? or like bills 
for the prevention of pestilence, or of drunkenness,--which, even if they 
pass, will both probably fail to do the good which they propose?  No.  
And if this wicked world is to be mended, then God must stir up the wills 
of His faithful people, and we must pray without ceasing for ourselves, 
and for all for whom we are bound to pray, that He would stir them up.  
For what we want is not knowledge; we have enough of that, and too much.  
Too much; for knowing so much and doing so little, what an account will 
be required of us at the last day!

No.  It is the will which we want, in a hundred cases.  Take that of 
pestilential dwelling-houses in our great towns.  Every one knows that 
they ought to be made healthy; every one knows that they can be made 
healthy.  But the will to make them healthy is not here, and they are 
left to breed disease and death.  And so, as in a hundred instances, 
shallow philosophers are proved, by facts, to be mistaken, when they tell 
us that man will act up to the best of his knowledge without God's help.  
For that is exactly what man does not.  What is wrong with the world in 
general, is wrong likewise more or less with you and me, and with all 
human beings; for after all, the world is made up of human beings; and 
the sin of the world is nothing save the sins of each and all human 
beings put together; and the world will be renewed and come right again, 
just as far and no farther, as each human being is renewed and comes 
right.  The only sure method, therefore, of setting the world right, is 
to begin by setting our own little part of the world right--in a word, 
setting ourselves right.

But if we begin to try, that, we find, is just what we cannot do.  When a 
man begins to hunger and thirst after righteousness, and, discontented 
with himself, attempts to improve himself, he soon begins to find a 
painful truth in many a word of the Bible and the Prayer Book to which he 
gave little heed, as long as he was contented with himself, and with 
doing just what pleased him, right or wrong.  He soon finds out that he 
has no power of himself to help himself, that he is tied and bound with 
the burden of his sins, and that he cannot, by reason of his frailty, 
stand upright--that he actually is sore let and hindered by his own sins, 
from running the race set before him, and doing his duty where God has 
put him.  All these sayings come home to him as actual facts, most 
painful facts, but facts which he cannot deny.  He soon finds out the 
meaning and the truth of that terrible struggle between the good in him 
and the evil in him, of which St Paul speaks so bitterly in the text.  
How, when he tries to do good, evil is present with him.  How he delights 
in the law of God with his inward mind, and yet finds another law in his 
body, warring against the law of God, and bringing him into captivity to 
the law of sin.  How he is crippled by old bad habits, weakened by 
cowardice, by laziness, by vanity, by general inability of will, till he 
is ready,--disgusted at himself and his own weakness,--to cry, Who shall 
deliver me from the body of this death?

Let him but utter that cry honestly.  Let him once find out that he wants 
something outside himself to help him, to deliver him, to strengthen him, 
to stir up his weak will, to give him grace and power to do what he knows 
instead of merely admiring it, and leaving it undone.  Let a man only 
find out that.  Let him see that he needs a helper, a deliverer, a 
strengthener--in one word, a Saviour--and he will find one.  I verily 
believe that, sooner or later, the Lord Jesus Christ will reveal to that 
man what He revealed to St Paul; that He Himself will deliver him; and 
that, like St Paul, after crying "O wretched man that I am, who shall 
deliver me from the body of this death?" he will be able to answer 
himself, I thank God--God will, through Jesus Christ our Lord.  Christ 
will deliver me from the bonds of my sins, Christ will stir up this weak 
will of mine, Christ will give me strength and power, faithfully to 
fulfil all my good desires, because He Himself has put them into my heart 
not to mock me, not to disappoint me--not to make me wretched with the 
sight of noble graces and virtues to which I cannot attain, but to fulfil 
His work in me.  What He has begun in me He will carry on in me.  He has 
sown the seed in me, and He will make it bear fruit, if only I pray to 
Him, day by day, for strength to do what I know I ought to do, and cry 
morning and night to Him, the fount of life, Stir up my will, O Lord, 
that I may bring forth the fruit of good works, for then by Thee I shall 
be plentifully rewarded.

So the man gains hope and heart for himself, and so, if he will but think 
rationally and humbly, he may gain hope and heart for this poor sinful 
world.  For what has come true for him may come true for any man.  Who is 
he that God should care more for him than for others?  Who is he that God 
should help him when he prays, more than He will help His whole church if 
it will but pray?  He says to himself, all this knowledge of what is 
right; all these good desires, all these longings after a juster, purer, 
nobler, happier state of things; there they are up and down the world 
already, though, alas! they have borne little enough fruit as yet.  Be it 
so.  But God put them into my heart.  And who save God has put them into 
the world's heart?  It was God who sowed the seed in me; surely it is God 
who has sowed it in other men?  And if God has made it bear even the 
poorest fruit in me, why should He not make it bear fruit in other men 
and in all the world?  All they need is that God should stir up their 
wills, that they may do the good they know, and attain the blessedness 
after which they long.

And then, if the man have a truly human, truly reasonable heart in him--
he feels that he can pray for others as well as for himself.  He feels 
that he must pray for them, and cry,--Thou alone canst make men strong to 
do the right thing, and Thou wilt make them.  Stir up their wills, O 
Lord!  Thou canst not mean that all the good seed which is sown about the 
world should die and wither, and bring no fruit to perfection.  Surely 
Thy word will not return to Thee void, but be like the rain which comes 
down from heaven, and gives seed to the sower and bread to the eater.  
Oh, strengthen such as stand, and comfort and help the weak-hearted, and 
raise up them that fall, and, finally, beat down Satan and all the powers 
of evil under our feet, and pour out thy spirit on all flesh, that so 
their Father's name may be hallowed, His kingdom come, His will be done 
on earth as it is in heaven.  And so will come the one and only true 
progress of the human race--which is, that all men should become faithful 
and obedient citizens of the holy city, the kingdom of God, which is the 
Church of Christ.  To which may God in His mercy bring us all, and our 
children after us.  Amen.

This, then, is the lesson why we are met together this Advent day.  We 
are met to pray that God would so help us by His grace and mercy that we 
may bring forth the fruit of good works, and that when our Lord Jesus 
Christ shall come in His glorious majesty to judge the quick and the 
dead, we, and our descendants after us, may be found an acceptable people 
in His sight.

We are met to pray, in a National Church, for the whole nation of 
England, that all orders and degrees therein may, each in his place and 
station, help forward the hallowing of God's name, the coming of His 
kingdom, the doing of His will on earth.  We are met to pray for the 
Queen and all that are in authority, that these Advent collects may be 
fulfilled in them, and by them, for the good of the whole people; for the 
ministers and stewards of Christ's mysteries, that the same collects may 
be fulfilled by them and in them, till they turn the hearts of the 
disobedient to the wisdom of the just; for the Commons of this nation, 
that each man may he delivered, by God's grace and mercy, from the 
special sin which besets him in this faithless and worldly generation and 
hinders him from running the race of duty which is set before him, and 
get strength from God so to live that in that dread day he may meet his 
Judge and King, not in tenor and in shame, but in loyalty and in humble 
hope.

But more--we are here to worship God in Christ, both God and man.  To 
confess that without Him we can do nothing, that unless He enlighten our 
understandings we are dark, unless He stir up our wills we are powerless 
for good.  To confess that though we have forgotten Him, yet He has not 
forgotten us.   That He is the same gracious and generous Giver and 
Saviour.  That though we deny Him He cannot deny Himself.  That He is the 
same yesterday, to-day, and for ever as when He came to visit this earth 
in great humility.  That the Lord is King, though the earth be moved.  He 
sitteth upon His throne, be the nations never so unquiet.  We are here to 
declare to ourselves and all men, and the whole universe, that we at 
least believe that the heavens and earth are full of His glory.  We are 
here to declare that, whether or not the kings of the earth are wise 
enough, or the judges of it learned enough, to acknowledge Christ for 
their king, we at least will worship the Son lest He be angry, and so we 
perish from the right way; for if His wrath be kindled, yea but a little, 
then blessed are they, and they only, who put their trust in Him.  We are 
here to join our songs with angels round the throne, and with those pure 
and mighty beings who, in some central sanctuary of the universe, cry for 
ever, "Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour and power:  
for Thou hast created all things, and for Thy pleasure they are and were 
created."

We do so in ancient words, ancient music, ancient ceremonies, for a token 
that Christ's rule and glory is an ancient rule and an eternal glory; 
that it is no new discovery of our own, and depends not on our own 
passing notions and feelings about it, but is like Christ, the same now 
as in the days of our forefathers, the same as it was fifteen hundred 
years ago, the same as it has been since the day that He stooped to be 
born of the Virgin Mary, the same that it will be till He shall come in 
His glory to judge the quick and the dead.  Therefore we delight in the 
ancient ceremonial, as like as we can make it, to that of the earlier and 
purer ages of the Church, when Christianity was still, as it were, fresh 
from the hand of its Creator, ere yet it had been debased and defiled by 
the idolatrous innovations of the Church of Rome.  For so we confess 
ourselves bound by links of gratitude to the Apostles, and the successors 
of the Apostles, and to all which has been best, purest, and truest in 
the ages since.  So we confess that we worship the same God-man of whom 
Apostles preached, of whom fathers philosophised, and for whom martyrs 
died.  That we believe, like them, that He alone is King of kings and 
Lord of lords; that there is no progress, civilization, or salvation in 
this life or the life to come, but through His undeserved mercy and His 
strengthening grace; that He has reigned from the creation of the world, 
reigns now, and will reign unto that last dread day, when He shall have 
put all enemies under His feet, and delivered up the kingdom to God, even 
the Father, that God may be all in all.  Unto which day may He in His 
mercy bring us all through faith and good works:  Amen.



SERMON VI.  CAPITAL PUNISHMENT



Eversley.  Quinquagesima Sunday, 1872.

Genesis ix. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6.  "And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said 
unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth. . . .  
Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you . . .  But flesh 
with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall ye not eat.  And 
surely your blood of your lives will I require:  at the hand of every 
beast will I require it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of every 
man's brother will I require the life of man.  Whoso sheddeth man's 
blood, by man shall his blood be shed:  for in the image of God made he 
man."

This is God's blessing on mankind.  This is our charter from God, who 
made and rules this earth.  This is the end and duty of our mortal life:-
-to be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth, and subdue it.  But 
is that all?  Is there no hint in this blessing of God of something more 
than our mortal life--something beyond our mortal life?  Surely there is.  
Those words--"in the image of God made He man," must mean, if they mean 
anything, that man can, if he will but be a true man, share the eternal 
life of God.  But I will not speak of that to-day, but rather of a 
question about his mortal life in this world, which is this:--What is the 
reason why man has a right over the lives of animals? why he may use them 
for his food? and at the same time, what is the reason why he has not the 
same right over the lives of his fellow-men? why he may not use them for 
food?

It is this--that "in the image of God made He man."  Man is made in the 
image and likeness of God, therefore he is a sacred creature; a creature, 
not merely an animal, and the highest of all animals, only cunninger than 
all animals, more highly organised, more delicately formed than all 
animals; but something beyond an animal.  He is in the likeness of God, 
therefore he is consecrated to God.  He is the one creature on earth whom 
God, so far as we know, is trying to make like Himself.  Therefore, 
whosoever kills a man, sins not only against that man, nor against 
society:  he sins against God.  And God will require that man's blood at 
the hand of him who slays him.  But how?  At the hand of every beast will 
He require it, and at the hand of every man.

What that first part of the law means I cannot tell.  How God will 
require from the lion, or the crocodile, or the shark, who eats a human 
being, the blood of their victims, is more than I can say.  But this I 
can say--that the feeling, not only of horror and pity, but of real rage 
and indignation, with which men see (what God grant you never may see) a 
wild beast kill a man, is a witness in man's conscience that the text is 
true somehow, though how we know not.  I received a letter a few weeks 
since from an officer, a very remarkable person, in which he described 
his horror and indignation at seeing a friend of his struck down and 
eaten by a tiger, and how, when next day he stood over what had been but 
the day before a human being, he looked up to heaven, and kept repeating 
the words of the text, "in the image of God made He man," in rage and 
shame, and almost accusing God for allowing His image to be eaten by a 
brute beast.  It shook, for the moment, his faith in God's justice and 
goodness.  That man was young then, and has grown calmer and wiser now, 
and has regained a deeper and sounder faith in God.  But the shock, he 
said, was dreadful to him.  He felt that the matter was not merely 
painful and pitiable, but that it was a wrong and a crime; and on the 
faith of this very text, a wrong and a crime I believe it to be, and one 
which God knows how to avenge and to correct when man cannot.  Somehow--
for He has ways of which we poor mortals do not dream--at the hand of 
every beast will He require the blood of man.

But more; at the hand of every man will He require it.  And how?  The 
text tells us, "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be 
shed:  for in the image of God made He man."  Now, I do not doubt but 
that the all-seeing God, looking back on what had most probably happened 
on this earth already, and looking forward to what would happen, and 
happens, alas! too often now, meant to warn men against the awful crime 
of cannibalism, of eating their fellow-men as they would eat an animal.  
By so doing, they not only treated their fellow-men as beasts, but they 
behaved like beasts themselves.  They denied that their victim was made 
in the likeness of God; they denied that they were made in the likeness 
of God; they willingly and deliberately put on the likeness of beasts, 
and as beasts they were to perish.  Now, this is certain, that savages 
who eat men--and alas! there are thousands even now who do so--usually 
know in their hearts that they are doing wrong.  As soon as their 
consciences are the least awakened, they are ashamed of their 
cannibalism; they lie about it, try to conceal it; and as soon as God's 
grace begins to work on them, it is the very first sin that they give up.  
And next, this is certain, that there is a curse upon it.  No cannibal 
people, so far as I can find, have ever risen or prospered in the world; 
and the cannibal peoples now-a-days, and for the last three hundred 
years, have been dying out.  By their own vices, diseases, and wars, they 
perish off the face of the earth, in the midst of comfort and plenty; 
and, in spite of all the efforts of missionaries, even their children and 
grand-children, after giving up the horrid crime, and becoming 
Christians, seem to have no power of living and increasing, but dwindle 
away, and perish off the earth.  Yes, God's laws work in strange and 
subtle ways; so darkly, so slowly, that the ungodly and sinners often 
believe that there are no laws of God, and say--"Tush, how should God 
perceive it?  Is there knowledge in the Most High?"  But the laws work, 
nevertheless, whether men are aware of them or not.  "The mills of God 
grind slowly," but sooner or later they grind the sinner to powder.

And now I will leave this hateful subject and go on to another, on which 
I am moved to speak once and for all, because it is much in men's minds 
just now--I mean what is vulgarly called "capital punishment," the 
punishing of murder by death.  Now the text, which is the ancient 
covenant of God with man, speaks very clearly on this point.  "Whosoever 
sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed."  Man is made in 
the likeness of God.  That is the ground of our law about murder, as it 
is the ground of all just and merciful law; that gives man his right to 
slay the murderer; that makes it his duty to slay the murderer.  He has 
to be jealous of God's likeness, and to slay, in the name of God, the man 
who, by murder, outrages the likeness of God in himself and in his 
victim.

You all know that there is now-a-days a strong feeling among some persons 
about capital punishment; that there are those who will move heaven and 
earth to interfere with the course of justice, and beg off the worst of 
murderers, on any grounds, however unreasonable, fanciful, even unfair; 
simply because they have a dislike to human beings being hanged.  I 
believe, from long consideration, that these persons' strange dislike 
proceeds from their not believing sufficiently that man is made in the 
image of God.  And, alas! it proceeds, I fear, in some of them, from not 
believing in a God at all--believing, perhaps, in some mere maker of the 
world, but not in the living God which Scripture sets forth.  For how 
else can they say, as I have known some say, that capital punishment is 
wrong, because "we have no right to usher a man into the presence of his 
Maker."

Into the presence of his Maker!  Why, where else is every man, you and I, 
heathen and Christian, bad and good, save in the presence of his Maker 
already?  Do we not live and move and have our being in God?  Whither can 
we go from His spirit, or whither can we flee from His presence?  If we 
ascend into heaven, He is there.  If we go down to hell He is there also.  
And if the law puts a man to death, it does not usher him into the 
presence of his Maker, for he is there already.  It simply says to him, 
"God has judged you on earth, not we.  God will judge you in the next 
world, not we.  All we know is, that you are not fit to live in this 
world.  All our duty is to send you out of it.  Where you will go in the 
other world is God's matter, not ours, and the Lord have mercy on your 
soul."

And this want of faith in a living God lies at the bottom of another 
objection.  We are to keep murderers alive in order to convert and 
instruct and amend them.  The answer is, We shall be most happy to amend 
anybody of any fault, however great:  but the experience of ages is that 
murderers are past mending; that the fact of a man's murdering another is 
a plain proof that he has no moral sense, and has become simply a brute 
animal Our duty is to punish not to amend, and to say to the murderer, 
"If you can be amended; God will amend you, and so have mercy on your 
soul.  God must amend you, if you are to be amended.  If God cannot amend 
you, we cannot.  If God will not amend you, certainly we cannot force Him 
to do so, if we kept you alive for a thousand years."  That would seem 
reasonable, as well as reverent and faithful to God.  But men now-a-days 
fancy that they love their fellow creatures far better than God loves 
them, and can deal far more wisely and lovingly with them than God is 
willing to deal.  Of these objections I take little heed.  I look on them 
as merely loose cant, which does not quite understand the meaning of its 
own words, and I trust to sound, hard, English common sense to put them 
aside.

But there is another objection to capital punishment, which we must deal 
with much more respectfully and tenderly; for it is made by certain good 
people, people whom we must honour, though we differ from them, for no 
set of people have done more (according to their numbers) for education, 
for active charity, and for benevolence, and for peace and good will 
among the nations of the earth.  And they say, you must not take the life 
of a murderer, just because he is made in God's image.  Well, I should 
have thought that God Himself was the best judge of that.  That, if God 
truly said that man was made in His image, and said, moreover, as it were 
at the same moment, that, therefore, whoso sheds man's blood, by man 
shall his blood be shed--our duty was to trust God, to obey God, and to 
do our duty against the murderer, however painful to our feelings it 
might be.  But I believe these good people make their mistake from 
forgetting this; that if the murderer be made in God's image and 
likeness, so is the man whom he murders; and so also is the jury who 
convict him, the judge who condemns him, and the nation (the society of 
men) for whom they act.

And this, my dear friends, brings us to the very root of the meaning of 
law.  Man has sense to make laws (which animals cannot do), just because 
he is made in the likeness of God, and has the sense of right and wrong.  
Man has the right to enforce laws, to see right done and wrong punished, 
just because he is made in the likeness of God.  The laws of a country, 
as far as they are just and righteous, are the copy of what the men of 
that country have found out about right and wrong, and about how much 
right they can get done, and how much wrong punished.  So, just as the 
men of a country are (in spite of all their sins) made in the likeness of 
God, so the laws of a country (in spite of all their defects) are a copy 
of God's will, as to what men should or should not do.  And that, and no 
other, is the true reason why the judge or magistrate has authority over 
either property, liberty, or life.  He is God's servant, the servant of 
Christ, who is King of this land and of all lands, and of all 
governments, and all kings and rulers of the earth.  He sits there in 
God's name, to see God's will done, as far as poor fallible human beings 
can get it done.  And, because he is, not merely as a man, but, by his 
special authority, in the likeness of God, who has power over life and 
death, therefore he also, as far as his authority goes, has power over 
life and death.  That is my opinion, and that was the opinion of St. 
Paul.  For what does he say--and say not (remember always) of Christian 
magistrates in a Christian country, but actually of heathen Roman 
magistrates?  "Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers.  For 
there is no power but of God:  the powers that be are ordained of God.  
Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God:  
and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation."  Thus spoke 
out the tenderest-hearted, most Christ-like human being, perhaps, who 
ever trod this earth, who, in his intense longing to save sinners, 
endured a life of misery and danger, and finished it by martyrdom.  But 
there was no sentimentality, no soft indulgence in him.  He knew right 
from wrong; common sense from cant; duty from public opinion; and divine 
charity from the mere cowardly dislike of witnessing pain, not so much 
because it pains the person punished, as because it pains the spectator.  
He knew that Christ was King of kings, and what Christ's kingdom was 
like.  He had discovered the divine and wonderful order of men and 
angels.  He saw that one part of that order was--"the soul that sinneth, 
it shall die."

But some say that capital punishment is inconsistent with the mild 
religion of Christ--the religion of mercy and love.  "The mild religion 
of Christ!"  Do these men know of Whom they talk?  Do they know that, if 
the Bible be true, the God who said, "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man 
shall his blood be shed," is the very same Being, the very same God, who 
was born of the Virgin Mary, crucified under Pontius Pilate--the very 
same Christ who took little children up in His arms and blessed them, the 
very same Word of God, too, of whom it is written, that out of His mouth 
goeth a two-edged sword, that He may smite the nations, and He shall rule 
them with a rod of iron, and He treadeth the wine press of the fierceness 
and wrath of Almighty God?  These are awful words, but, my dear friends, 
I can only ask you if you think them too awful to be true?  Do you 
believe the Christian religion?  Do you believe the Creeds?  Do you 
believe the Bible?  For if you do, then you believe that the Lord Christ, 
who was born of the Virgin Mary, and crucified under Pontius Pilate, is 
the Maker, the Master, the Ruler of this world, and of all worlds.  By 
what laws He rules other worlds we know not, save that they are, because 
they must be--just and merciful laws.  But of the laws by which He rules 
this world we do know, by experience, that His laws are of most terrible 
and unbending severity, as I have warned you again and again, and shall 
warn you, as long as there is a liar or an idler, a drunkard or an 
adulteress in this parish.

And if this be so--if Christ be a God of severity as well as a God of 
love, a God who punishes sinners as well as a God who forgives penitents-
-what then?  We are, He tells us, made in His likeness.  Then, according 
to His likeness we must behave.  We must copy His love, by helping the 
poor and afflicted, the weak and the oppressed.  But we must copy His 
severity, by punishing whenever we have the power, without cowardice or 
indulgence, all wilful offenders; and, above all, the man who destroys 
God's image in himself, by murdering and destroying the mortal life of a 
man made in the image of God.  And more; if we be made in the likeness of 
God and of Christ, we must remember, morning and night, and all day long, 
that most awful and most blessed fact.  We must say to ourselves, again 
and again, "I am not a mere animal, and like a mere animal I must not 
behave; I dare not behave like a mere animal, for I was made in the 
likeness of God; and when I was baptised the Spirit of God took 
possession of me to restore me to God's likeness, and to call out and 
perfect God's likeness in me all my life long.  Therefore, I am no mere 
animal; and never was intended to be.  I am the temple of God; my body 
and soul belong to God, and not to my own fancies and passions and lusts, 
and whosoever defiles the temple of God, him will God destroy."

Therefore, this is our duty, this is our only hope or safety--to do our 
best to keep alive and strong the likeness of God in ourselves; to try to 
grow, not more and more mean, and brutal, and carnal, but more and more 
noble, and human, and spiritual; to crush down our base passions, our 
selfish inclinations, by the help of the Spirit of God, and to think of 
and to pray for, whatsoever is like Christ and like God; to pray for a 
noble love of what is good and noble, for a noble hate of what is bad; 
and whatsoever things are pure and lovely and of good report to think of 
these things.  And to pray, too, for forgiveness from Christ, and for the 
sake of Christ, whenever we have yielded to our low passions, and defiled 
the likeness of God in us, and grieved His Spirit, lest at the last day 
it be said to us, if not in words yet in acts, which there will be no 
mistaking, no escaping,--"I made thee in My likeness in the beginning of 
the creation, I redeemed thee into My likeness on the cross, I baptised 
thee into My likeness by my Holy Spirit; and what hast thou hast done 
with My likeness?  Thou hast cast it away, thou hast let it die out in 
thee, thou hast lived after the flesh and not after the spirit, and hast 
put on the likeness of the carnal man, the likeness of the brute.  Thou 
hast copied the vanity of the peacock, the silliness of the ape, the 
cunning of the fox, the rapacity of the tiger, the sensuality of the 
swine; but thou hast not copied God, thy God, who died that thou mightest 
live, and be a man.  Then, thou hast destroyed God's likeness, for thou 
hast destroyed it in thyself.  Thou hast slain a man, for thou hast slain 
thy own manhood, and art thine own murderer, and thine own blood shall be 
required at thy hand.  That which thou hast done to God's likeness in 
thee, shall be done to that which remains of thee in a second death."

And from that may Christ in His mercy deliver us all.  Amen.



SERMON VII.  TEMPTATION



Eversley, 1872.  Chester Cathedral, 1872.

St Matt. iv. 3.  "And when the tempter came to Him, he said, If Thou be 
the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread."

Let me say a few words to-day about a solemn subject, namely, Temptation.  
I do not mean the temptations of the flesh--the temptations which all men 
have to yield to the low animal nature in them, and behave like brutes.  
I mean those deeper and more terrible temptations, which our Lord 
conquered in that great struggle with evil which is commonly called His 
temptation in the wilderness.  These were temptations of an evil spirit--
the temptations which entice some men, at least, to behave like devils.

Now these temptations specially beset religious men--men who are, or 
fancy themselves, superior to their fellow-men, more favoured by God, and 
with nobler powers, and grander work to do, than the common average of 
mankind.  But specially, I say, they beset those who are, or fancy 
themselves, the children of God.  And, therefore, I humbly suppose our 
Lord had to endure and to conquer these very temptations because He was 
not merely a child of God, but the Son of God--the perfect Man, made in 
the perfect likeness of His Father.  He had to endure these temptations, 
and to conquer them, that He might be able to succour us when we are 
tempted, seeing that He was tempted in like manner as we are, yet without 
sin.

Now it has been said, and, I think, well said, that what proves our 
Lord's three temptations to have been very subtle and dangerous and 
terrible, is this--that we cannot see at first sight that they were 
temptations at all.  The first two do not look to us to be wrong.  If our 
Lord could make stones into bread to satisfy His hunger, why should He 
not do so?  If He could prove to the Jews that He was the Son of God, 
their divine King and Saviour, by casting Himself down from the pinnacle 
of the temple, and being miraculously supported in the air by angels--if 
He could do that, why should He not do it?  And lastly, the third 
temptation looks at first sight so preposterous that it seems silly of 
the evil spirit to have hinted at it.  To ask any man of piety, much less 
the Son of God Himself, to fall down and worship the devil, seems 
perfectly absurd--a request not to be listened to for a moment, but put 
aside with contempt.

Well, my friends, and the very danger of these spiritual temptations is--
that they do not look like temptations.  They do not look ugly, absurd, 
wrong, they look pleasant, reasonable, right.

The devil, says the apostle, transforms himself at times into an angel of 
light.  If so, then he is certainly far more dangerous than if he came as 
an angel of darkness and horror.  If you met some venomous snake, with 
loathsome spots upon his scales, his eyes full of rage and cunning, his 
head raised to strike at you, hissing and showing his fangs, there would 
be no temptation to have to do with him.  You would know that you had to 
deal with an evil beast, and must either kill him or escape from him at 
once.  But if, again, you met, as you may meet in the tropics, a lovely 
little coral snake, braided with red and white, its mouth so small that 
it seems impossible that it can bite, and so gentle that children may 
take it up and play with it, then you might be tempted, as many a poor 
child has been ere now, to admire it, fondle it, wreathe it round the 
neck for a necklace, or round the arm for a bracelet, till the play goes 
one step too far, the snake loses its temper, gives one tiny scratch upon 
the lip or finger, and that scratch is certain death.  That would be a 
temptation indeed; one all the more dangerous because there is, I am 
told, another sort of coral snake perfectly harmless, which is so exactly 
like the deadly one, that no child, and few grown people, can know them 
apart.

Even so it is with our worst temptations.  They look sometimes so exactly 
like what is good and noble and useful and religious, that we mistake the 
evil for the good, and play with it till it stings us, and we find out 
too late that the wages of sin are death.  Thus religious people, just 
because they are religious, are apt to be specially tempted to mistake 
evil for good, to do something specially wrong, when they think they are 
doing something specially right, and so give occasion to the enemies of 
the Lord to blaspheme; till, as a hard and experienced man of the world 
once said:  "Whenever I hear a man talking of his conscience, I know that 
he is going to do something particularly foolish; whenever I hear of a 
man talking of his duty, I know that he is going to do something 
particularly cruel."

Do I say this to frighten you away from being religious?  God forbid.  
Better to be religious and to fear and love God, though you were tempted 
by all the devils out of the pit, than to be irreligious and a mere 
animal, and be tempted only by your own carnal nature, as the animals 
are.  Better to be tempted, like the hermits of old, and even to fall and 
rise again, singing, "Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, when I fall I 
shall arise;" than to live the life of the flesh, "like a beast with 
lower pleasures, like a beast with lower pains."  It is the price a man 
must pay for hungering and thirsting after righteousness, for longing to 
be a child of God in spirit and in truth.  "The devil," says a wise man 
of old, "does not tempt bad men, because he has got them already; he 
tempts good men, because he has NOT got them, and wants to get them."

But how shall we know these temptations?  God knows, my friends, better 
than I; and I trust that He will teach you to know, according to what 
each of you needs to know.  But as far as my small experience goes, the 
root of them all is pride and self-conceit.  Whatsoever thoughts or 
feelings tempt us to pride and self-conceit are of the devil, not of God.  
The devil is specially the spirit of pride; and, therefore, whatever 
tempts you to fancy yourself something different from your fellow-men, 
superior to your fellow men, safer than them, more favoured by God than 
them, that is a temptation of the spirit of pride.  Whatever tempts you 
to think that you can do without God's help and God's providence; 
whatever tempts you to do anything extraordinary, and show yourself off, 
that you may make a figure in the world; and above all, whatever tempts 
you to antinomianism, that is, to fancy that God will overlook sins in 
you which He will not overlook in other men--all these are temptations 
from the spirit of pride.  They are temptations like our Lord's 
temptations.  These temptations came on our Lord more terribly than they 
ever can on you and me, just because He was the Son of Man, the perfect 
Man, and, therefore, had more real reason for being proud (if such a 
thing could be) than any man, or than all men put together.  But He 
conquered the temptations because He was perfect Man, led by the Spirit 
of God; and, therefore, He knew that the only way to be a perfect man was 
not to be proud, however powerful, wise, and glorious He might be; but to 
submit Himself humbly and utterly, as every man should do, to the will of 
His Father in Heaven, from whom alone His greatness came.

Now the spirit of pride cannot understand the beauty of humility, and the 
spirit of self-will cannot understand the beauty of obedience; and, 
therefore, it is reasonable to suppose the devil could not understand our 
Lord.  If He be the Son of God, so might Satan argue, He has all the more 
reason to be proud; and, therefore, it is all the more easy to tempt Him 
into shewing His pride, into proving Himself a conceited, self-willed, 
rebellious being--in one word, an evil spirit.

And therefore (as you will see at first sight) the first two temptations 
were clearly meant to tempt our Lord to pride; for would they not tempt 
you and me to pride?  If we could feed ourselves by making bread of 
stones, would not that make us proud enough?  So proud, I fear, that we 
should soon fancy that we could do without God and His providence, and 
were masters of nature and all her secrets.  If you and I could make the 
whole city worship and obey us, by casting ourselves off this cathedral 
unhurt, would not that make us proud enough?  So proud, I fear, that we 
should end in committing some great folly, or great crime in our conceit 
and vainglory.

Now, whether our Lord could or could not have done these wonderful deeds, 
one thing is plain--that He would not do them; and, therefore, we may 
presume that He ought not to have done them.  It seems as if He did not 
wish to be a wonderful man:  but only a perfectly good man, and He would 
do nothing to help Himself but what any other man could do.  He answered 
the evil spirit simply out of Scripture, as any other pious man might 
have done.  When He was bidden to make the stones into bread, He answers 
not as the Eternal Son of God, but simply as a man.  "It is written:"--it 
is the belief of Moses and the old prophets of my people that man doth 
not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the 
mouth of God:--as much as to say, If I am to be delivered out of this 
need, God will deliver me by some means or other, just as He delivers 
other men out of their needs.  When He was bidden cast Himself from the 
temple, and so save Himself, probably from sorrow, poverty, persecution, 
and the death on the cross, He answers out of Scripture as any other Jew 
would have done.  "It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy 
God."  He says nothing--this is most important--of His being the eternal 
Son of God.  He keeps that in the background.  There the fact was; but He 
veiled the glory of His godhead, that He might assert the rights of His 
manhood, and shew that mere man, by the help of the Spirit of God, could 
obey God, and keep His commandments.

I say these last words with all diffidence and humility, and trusting 
that the Lord will pardon any mistake which I may make about His Divine 
Words.  I only say them because wiser men than I have often taken the 
same view already.  Of course there is more, far more, in this wonderful 
saying than we can understand, or ever will understand.  But this I think 
is plain--that our Lord determined to behave as any and every other man 
ought to have done in His place; in order to shew all God's children the 
example of perfect humility and perfect obedience to God.

But again, the devil asked our Lord to fall down and worship him.  Now 
how could that be a temptation to pride?  Surely that was asking our Lord 
to do anything but a proud action, rather the most humiliating and most 
base of all actions.  My friends, it seems to me that if our Lord had 
fallen down and worshipped the evil spirit, He would have given way to 
the spirit of pride utterly and boundlessly; and I will tell you why.

The devil wanted our Lord to do evil that good might come.  It would have 
been a blessing, that all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of man 
should be our Lord's,--the very blessing for this poor earth which He 
came to buy, and which He bought with His own precious blood.  And here 
the devil offered Him the very prize for which He came down on earth, 
without struggle or difficulty, if He would but do, for one moment, one 
wrong thing.  What temptation that would be to our Lord as God, I dare 
not say.  But that to our Lord as Man, it must have been the most 
terrible of all temptations, I can well believe:  because history shews 
us, and, alas! our own experience in modern times shews us, persons 
yielding to that temptation perpetually; pious people, benevolent people, 
people who long to spread the Bible, to convert sinners, to found 
charities, to amend laws, to set the world right in some way or other, 
and who fancy that therefore, in carrying out their fine projects, they 
have a right to do evil that good may come.

This is a very painful subject; all the more painful just now, because I 
sometimes think it is the special sin of this country and this 
generation, and that God will bring on us some heavy punishment for it.  
But all who know the world in its various phases, and especially what are 
called the religious world, and the philanthropic world, and the 
political world, know too well that men, not otherwise bad men, will do 
things and say things, to carry out some favourite project or movement, 
or to support some party, religious or other, which they would (I hope) 
be ashamed to say and do for their own private gain.  Now what is this, 
but worshipping the evil spirit, in order to get power over this world, 
that they may (as they fancy) amend it?  And what is this but self-
conceit--ruinous, I had almost said, blasphemous?  These people think 
themselves so certainly in the right, and their plans so absolutely 
necessary to the good of the world, that God has given them a special 
licence to do what they like in carrying them out; that He will excuse in 
them falsehoods and meannesses, even tyranny and violences which He will 
excuse in no one else.

Now, is not this self-conceit?  What would you think of a servant who 
disobeyed you, cheated you, and yet said to himself--No matter, my master 
dare not turn me off:  I am so useful that he cannot do without me.  Even 
so in all ages, and now as much as, or more than ever, have men said, We 
are so necessary to God and God's cause, that He cannot do without us; 
and therefore though He hates sin in everyone else, He will excuse sin in 
us, as long as we are about His business.

Therefore, my dear friends, whenever we are tempted to do or say anything 
rash, or vain, or mean, because we are the children of God; whenever we 
are inclined to be puffed up with spiritual pride, and to fancy that we 
may take liberties which other men must not take, because we are the 
children of God; let us remember the words of the text, and answer the 
tempter, when he says, If thou be the Son of God, do this and that, as 
our Lord answered him--"If I be the Child of God, what then?  This--that 
I must behave as if God were my Father.  I must trust my God utterly, and 
I must obey Him utterly.  I must do no rash or vain thing to tempt God, 
even though it looks as if I should have a great success, and do much 
good thereby.  I must do no mean or base thing, nor give way for a moment 
to the wicked ways of this wicked world, even though again it looks as if 
I should have a great success, and do much good thereby.  In one word, I 
must worship my Father in heaven, and Him only must I serve.  If He wants 
me, He will use me.  If He does not want me, He will use some one else.  
Who am I, that God cannot govern the world without my help?  My business 
is to refrain my soul, and keep it low, even as a weaned child, and not 
to meddle with matters too high for me.  My business is to do the little, 
simple, everyday duties which lie nearest me, and be faithful in a few 
things; and then, if Christ will, He may make me some day ruler over many 
things, and I shall enter into the joy of my Lord, which is the joy of 
doing good to my fellow men.  But I shall never enter into that by 
thrusting myself into Christ's way, with grand schemes and hasty 
projects, as if I knew better than He how to make His kingdom come.  If I 
do, my pride will have a fall.  Because I would not be faithful over a 
few things, I shall be tempted to be unfaithful over many things; and 
instead of entering into the joy of my Lord, I shall be in danger of the 
awful judgment pronounced on those who do evil that good may come, who 
shall say in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? 
and in thy name cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful 
works?  And then will He protest unto them--I never knew you.  Depart 
from me, ye that work iniquity."

Oh, my friends, in all your projects for good, as in all other matters 
which come before you in your mortal life, keep innocence and take heed 
to the thing that is right.  For that, and that alone, shall bring a man 
peace at the last.

To which, may God in His mercy bring us all.  Amen.



SERMON VIII.  MOTHER'S LOVE



Eversley, Second Sunday in Lent, 1872.

St Matthew xv. 22-28.  "And, behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the 
same coasts, and cried unto him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou 
son of David; my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil.  But he 
answered her not a word.  And his disciples came and besought him, 
saying, Send her away; for she crieth after us.  But he answered and 
said, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.  Then 
came she and worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me.  But he answered and 
said, It is not meet to take the children's bread, and to cast it to 
dogs.  And she said, Truth, Lord:  yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which 
fall from their master's table.  Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O 
woman, great is thy faith:  be it unto thee even as thou wilt.  And her 
daughter was made whole from that very hour."

If you want a proof from Scripture that there are two sides to our 
blessed Lord's character--that He is a Judge and an Avenger as well as a 
Saviour and a Pardoner--that He is infinitely severe as well as 
infinitely merciful--that, while we may come boldly to His throne of 
grace to find help and mercy in time of need, we must, at the same time, 
tremble before His throne of justice--if you want a proof of all this, I 
say, then look at the Epistle and the Gospel for this day.  Put them side 
by side, and compare them, and you will see how perfectly they shew, one 
after the other, the two sides.

The Epistle for the day tells men and women that they must lead moral, 
pure, and modest lives.  It does not advise them to do so.  It does not 
say, It will be better to do so, more proper and conducive to the good of 
society, more likely to bring you to heaven at last.  It says, You must, 
for it is the commandment of the Lord Jesus, and the will of God.  Let no 
man encroach on or defraud his brother in the matter, says St Paul; by 
which he means, Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife.  And why?  
"Because that the Lord is the avenger of all such, as we also have 
forewarned you and testified."

My friends, people talk loosely of the Thunder of Sinai and the rigour of 
Moses' law, and set them against what they call the gentle voice of the 
Gospel, and the mild religion of Christ.  Why, here are the Thunders of 
Sinai uttered as loud as ever, from the very foot of the Cross of Christ; 
and the terrible, "Thou shalt not," of Moses' law, with the curse of God 
for a penalty on the sinner, uttered by the Apostle of Faith, and 
Freedom, in the name of Christ and of God.  St Paul is not afraid to call 
Christ an Avenger.  How could he be?  He believed that it was Christ who 
spoke to Moses on Sinai--the very same Christ who prayed for His 
murderers, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do."  And 
he knew that Christ was the eternal Son of God, the same yesterday, to-
day, and for ever; that He had not changed since Moses' time, and could 
never change; that what He forbade in Moses' time, hated in Moses' time, 
and avenged in Moses' time, He would forbid, and hate, and avenge for 
ever.  And that, therefore, he who despises the warnings of the Law 
despises not man merely, but God, who has also given to us His Holy 
Spirit to know what is unchangeable, the everlastingly right, from what 
is everlastingly wrong.  So much for that side of our Lord's character; 
so much for sinners who, after their hardness and impenitent hearts, 
treasure up for themselves wrath against the day of wrath and revelation 
of the righteous judgment of God, in the day when God shall judge the 
secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to St Paul's Gospel.

But, when we turn to the Gospel for the day, we see the other side of our 
Lord's character, boundless condescension and boundless charity.  We see 
Him there still a Judge, as He always is and always will be, judging the 
secrets of a poor woman's heart, and that woman a heathen.  He judges her 
openly, in public, before His disciples.  But He is a Judge who judges 
righteous judgment, and not according to appearances; who is no respecter 
of persons; who is perfectly fair, even though the woman be a heathen:  
and, instead of condemning her and driving her away, He acquits her, He 
grants her prayer, He heals her daughter, even though that daughter was 
also a heathen, and one who knew Him not.  I say our Lord judged the 
woman after He had tried her, as gold is tried in the fire.  Why He did 
so, we cannot tell.  Perhaps He wanted, by the trial, to make her a 
better woman, to bring out something noble which lay in her heart unknown 
to her, though not to Him who knew what was in man.  Perhaps He wished to 
shew his disciples, who looked down on her as a heathen dog, that a 
heathen, too, could have faith, humility, nobleness, and grace of heart.  
Be that as it may, when the poor woman came crying to Him, He answered 
her not a word.  His disciples besought Him to send her away--and I am 
inclined to think that they wished Him to grant her what she asked, 
simply to be rid of her.  "Send her away," they said, "for she crieth 
after us."  Our Lord, we learn from St Mark, did not wish to be known in 
that place just then.  The poor woman, with her crying, was drawing 
attention to them, and, perhaps, gathering a crowd.  Somewhat noisy and 
troublesome, perhaps she was, in her motherly eagerness.  But our Lord 
was still seemingly stern.  He would not listen, it seemed, to His 
disciples any more than to the heathen woman.  "I am not sent but unto 
the lost sheep of the house of Israel."  So our Lord said, and (what is 
worth remembering) if He said so, what He said was true.  He was the King 
of the people of Israel, the Royal Prince of David's line; and, as a man, 
His duty was only to His own people.  And this woman was a Greek, a Syro-
phenician by nation--of a mixed race of people, notoriously low and 
profligate, and old enemies of the Jews.

Then, it seems, He went into a house, and would have no man know it.  
But, says St Mark, "He could not be hid."  The mother's wit found our 
Lord out, and the mother's heart urged her on, and, in spite of all His 
rebuffs, she seems to have got into the house and worshipped Him.  She 
"fell at His feet," says St Mark--doubtless bowing her forehead to the 
ground, in the fashion of those lands--an honour which was paid, I 
believe, only to persons who were royal or divine.  So she confessed that 
He was a king--perhaps a God come down on earth--and again she cried to 
Him.  "Lord, help me."  And what was our Lord's answer--seemingly more 
stern than ever?  "Let the children first be filled:  for it is not meet 
to take the children's bread and cast it unto the dogs."  Hard words.  
Yes:  but all depends on how they were spoken.  All depends on our Lord's 
look as He spoke them, and, even more, on the tone of His voice.  We all 
know that two men may use the very same words to us;--and the one shall 
speak sneeringly, brutally, and raise in us indignation or despair; 
another shall use the same words, but solemnly, tenderly, and raise in us 
confidence and hope.  And so it may have been--so, I fancy, it must have 
been--with the tone of our Lord's voice, with the expression of His face.  
Did He speak with a frown, or with something like a smile?  There must 
have been some tenderness, meaningness, pity in His voice which the quick 
woman's wit caught instantly, and the quick mother's heart interpreted as 
a sign of hope.

Let Him call her a dog if He would.  What matter to a mother to be called 
a dog, if she could thereby save her child from a devil?  Perhaps she was 
little better than a dog.  They were a bad people these Syrians, quick-

Back to Full Books